<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 23: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-23" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday, <time datetime="1738-04-14">April 14</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>Never did I hear of such a parcel of foolish toads as these Harlowes!⁠—Why, Belford, the lady must fall, if every hair of her head were a guardian angel, unless they were to make a visible appearance for her, or, snatching her from me at unawares, would draw her after them into the starry regions.</p>
					<p>All I had to apprehend, was, that a daughter, so reluctantly carried off, would offer terms to her father, and would be accepted upon a mutual <em>concedence</em>; <em>they</em> to give up <em>Solmes</em>; <em>she</em> to give up <em>me</em>. And so I was contriving to do all I could to guard against the latter. But they seem resolved to perfect the work they have begun.</p>
					<p>What stupid creatures are there in the world! This foolish brother not to know, that he who would be bribed to undertake a base thing by one, would be <em>over</em>-bribed to <em>retort</em> the baseness; especially when he could be put into the way to serve himself by both!⁠—Thou, Jack, wilt never know one half of my contrivances.</p>
					<p class="abstract">He here relates the conversation between him and the Lady (upon the subject of the noise and exclamations his agent made at the garden- door) to the same effect as in the Lady’s Letter, <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span> and proceeds exulting:</p>
					<p>What a capacity for glorious mischief has thy friend!⁠—Yet how near the truth all of it! The only derivation, my asserting that the fellow made the noises by <em>mistake</em>, and through <em>fright</em>, and not by <em>previous direction</em>: had she known the precise truth, her anger, to be so taken in, would never have let her forgive me.</p>
					<p>Had I been a military hero, I should have made gunpowder useless; for I should have blown up all my adversaries by dint of stratagem, turning their own devices upon them.</p>
					<p>But these fathers and mothers⁠—Lord help ’em!⁠—Were not the powers of nature stronger than those of discretion, and were not that busy <i xml:lang="la">dea bona</i> to afford her genial aids, till tardy prudence qualified parents to <em>manage</em> their future offspring, how few people would have children!</p>
					<p>James and Arabella may have <em>their</em> motives; but what can be said for a father acting as <em>this</em> father has acted? What for a mother? What for an aunt? What for uncles?⁠—Who can have patience with such fellows and fellowesses?</p>
					<p>Soon will the fair one hear how high their foolish resentments run against her: and then will she, it is to be hoped, have a little more confidence in me. Then will I be jealous that she loves me not with the preference my heart builds upon: then will I bring her to confessions of grateful love: and then will I kiss her when I please; and not stand trembling, as now, like a hungry hound, who sees a delicious morsel within his reach, (the froth hanging upon his vermilion jaws,) yet dares not leap at it for his life.</p>
					<p>But I was <em>originally</em> a bashful mortal. Indeed I am bashful still with regard to this lady⁠—Bashful, yet know the sex so well!⁠—But that indeed is the <em>reason</em> that I know it so well:⁠—For, Jack, I have had abundant cause, when I have looked into <em>myself</em>, by way of comparison with the <em>other</em> sex, to conclude that a bashful man has a good deal of the soul of a woman; and so, like Tiresias, can tell what they think, and what they drive at, as well as themselves.</p>
					<p>The modest ones and I, particularly, are pretty much upon a par. The difference between us is only, what they <em>think</em>, I <em>act</em>. But the immodest ones outdo the worst of us by a bar’s length, both in thinking and acting.</p>
					<p>One argument let me plead in proof of my assertion; That even we rakes love modesty in a woman; while the modest woman, as they are accounted, (that is to say, the <em>slyest</em>,) love, and generally prefer, an impudent man. Whence can this be, but from a likeness in nature? And this made the poet say, That ever woman is a rake in her heart. It concerns them, by their <em>actions</em>, to prove the contrary, if they can.</p>
					<p>Thus have I read in some of the philosophers, <q>That no wickedness is comparable to the wickedness of a woman.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a></q> Canst thou tell me, Jack, who says this? Was it Socrates? for he had the devil of a wife⁠—Or who? Or is it Solomon?⁠—King Solomon⁠—Thou remembrest to have read of such a king, dost thou not? <strong>Sol-o-mon</strong>, I learned, in my infant state (my mother was a good woman) to answer, when asked, <q>Who was the wisest man?</q>⁠—But my indulgent questioner never asked me how he came by the uninspired part of his wisdom.</p>
					<p>Come, come, Jack, you and I are not so very bad, could we but stop where we are.</p>
					<p class="abstract">He then gives the particulars of what passed between him and the Lady on his menaces relating to her brother and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes, and of his design to punish Betty Barnes and Joseph Leman.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
