<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter XI: Mr. Belford, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sat. <abbr>Morn.</abbr> <time datetime="1738-08-19"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 19</time></p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Madam,</p>
					</header>
					<p>I think myself obliged in honour to acquaint you that I am afraid <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace will try his fate by an interview with you.</p>
					<p>I wish to Heaven you could prevail upon yourself to receive his visit. All that is respectful, even to veneration, and all that is penitent, will you see in his behaviour, if you can admit of it. But as I am obliged to set out directly for Epsom, (to perform, as I apprehend, the last friendly offices for poor <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belton, whom once you saw,) and as I think it more likely that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace will <em>not</em> be prevailed upon, than that he <em>will</em>, I thought fit to give you this intimation, lest, if he should come, you should be too much surprised.</p>
					<p>He flatters himself that you are not so ill as I represent you to be. When he sees you, he will be convinced that the most obliging things he can do, will be as proper to be done for the sake of his own future peace of mind, as for your health-sake; and, I dare say, in fear of hurting the latter, he will forbear the thoughts of any farther intrusion; at least while you are so much indisposed: so that <em>one half-hour’s shock</em>, if it <em>will</em> be a shock to see the unhappy man, (but just got up himself from a dangerous fever,) will be all you will have occasion to stand.</p>
					<p>I beg you will not too much hurry and discompose yourself. It is impossible he can be in town till Monday, at soonest. And if he resolve to come, I hope to be at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith’s before him.</p>
					<p>I am, Madam, with the profoundest veneration,</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your most faithful and most obedient servant,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Belford.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
