<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 7: Mr. Lovelace</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p class="explanatory">In Continuation</p>
					</header>
					<p>It is much better, Jack, to tell your own story, when it <em>must</em> be known, than to have an adversary tell it for you. Conscious of this, I gave them a particular account how urgent I had been with her to fix upon the Thursday after I left her (it being her uncle Harlowe’s anniversary birthday, and named to oblige her) for the private celebration; having some days before actually procured a license, which still remained with her.</p>
					<p>That, not being able to prevail upon her to promise anything, while under a supposed restraint! I offered to leave her at full liberty, if she would give me the least hope for that day. But neither did this offer avail me.</p>
					<p>That this inflexibleness making me desperate, I resolved to add to my former fault, by giving directions that she should not either go or correspond out of the house, till I returned from M. Hall; well knowing, that if she were at full liberty, I must forever lose her.</p>
					<p>That this constraint had so much incensed her, that although I wrote no less than four different letters, I could not procure a single word in answer; though I pressed her but for four words to signify the day and the church.</p>
					<p>I referred to my two cousins to vouch for me the extraordinary methods I took to send messengers to town, though they knew not the occasion; which now I told them was <em>this</em>.</p>
					<p>I acquainted them, that I even had wrote to you, Jack, and to another gentleman of whom I thought she had a good opinion, to attend her, in order to press for her compliance; holding myself in readiness the last day, at Salt-hill, to meet the messenger they should send, and proceed to London, if his message were favourable. But that, before they could attend her, she had found means to fly away once more: and is now, said I, perched perhaps somewhere under Lady Betty’s window at Glenham-hall; and there, like the sweet Philomela, a thorn in her breast, warbles forth her melancholy complaints against her barbarous Tereus.</p>
					<p>Lady Betty declared that she was not with <em>her</em>; nor did she know where she was. She should be, she added, the most welcome guest to her that she ever received.</p>
					<p>In truth, I had a suspicion that she was already in their knowledge, and taken into their protection; for Lady Sarah I imagined incapable of being roused to this spirit by a letter only from Miss Harlowe, and that not directed to herself; she being a very indolent and melancholy woman. But her sister, I find had wrought her up to it: for Lady Betty is as officious and managing a woman as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howe; but of a much more generous and noble disposition⁠—she is <em>my aunt</em>, Jack.</p>
					<p>I supposed, I said, that her Ladyship might have a private direction where to send to her. I spoke as I wished: I would have given the world to have heard that she was inclined to cultivate the interest of any of my family.</p>
					<p>Lady Betty answered that she had no direction but what was in the letter; which she had scratched out, and which, it was probable, was only a temporary one, in order to avoid me: otherwise she would hardly have directed an answer to be left at an inn. And she was of opinion, that to apply to Miss Howe would be the only certain way to succeed in any application for forgiveness, would I enable that young lady to interest herself in procuring it.</p>
					<p><query id="speaker">Miss Charlotte</query>. Permit me to make a proposal.⁠—Since we are all of one mind, in relation to the justice due to Miss Harlowe, if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace will oblige himself to marry her, I will make Miss Howe a visit, little as I am acquainted with her; and endeavour to engage her interest to forward the desired reconciliation. And if this can be done, I make no question but all may be happily accommodated; for everybody knows the love there is between Miss Harlowe and Miss Howe.</p>
					<p><strong>Marriage</strong>, <em>with these women, thou seest, Jack, is an atonement for all we can do to them. A true dramatic recompense!</em></p>
					<p>This motion was highly approved of; and I gave my honour, as desired, in the fullest manner they could wish.</p>
					<p>Lady Sarah. Well then, Cousin Charlotte, begin your treaty with Miss Howe, out of hand.</p>
					<p>Lady Betty. Pray do. And let Miss Harlowe be told, that I am ready to receive her as the most welcome of guests: and I will not have her out of my sight till the knot is tied.</p>
					<p>Lady Sarah. Tell her from me, that she shall be my daughter, instead of my poor Betsey!⁠—And shed a tear in remembrance of her lost daughter.</p>
					<p>Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> What say you, Sir, to this?</p>
					<p>Lovel. <strong>Content</strong>, my Lord, I speak in the language of your house.</p>
					<p>Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> We are not to be fooled, Nephew. No quibbling. We will have no slur put upon us.</p>
					<p>Lovel. You shall not. And yet, I did not intend to marry, if she exceeded the appointed Thursday. But, I think (according to her own notions) that I have injured her beyond reparation, although I were to make her the best of husbands; as I am resolved to be, if she will <em>condescend</em>, as I will call it, to have me. And be this, Cousin Charlotte, <em>my</em> part of your commission to say.</p>
					<p>This pleased them all.</p>
					<p>Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> Give me thy hand, Bob!⁠—Thou talkest like a man of honour at last. I hope we may depend upon what thou sayest!</p>
					<p>The Ladies eyes put the same question to me.</p>
					<p>Lovel. You may, my Lord⁠—You may, Ladies⁠—absolutely you may.</p>
					<p>Then was the personal character of the lady, as well as her more extraordinary talents and endowments again expatiated upon: and Miss Patty, who had once seen her, launched out more than all the rest in her praise. These were followed by such inquiries as are never forgotten to be made in marriage-treaties, and which generally are the <em>principal motives</em> with the <em>sages</em> of a family, though the <em>least to be mentioned</em> by the <em>parties</em> themselves, and yet even by <em>them</em>, perhaps, the <em>first</em> thought of: that is to say, inquisition into the lady’s fortune; into the particulars of the grandfather’s estate; and what her father, and her single-souled uncles, will probably do for her, if a reconciliation be effected; as, by their means, they make no doubt but it will be between both families, if it be not my fault. The two venerables (no longer tabbies with me now) hinted at rich presents on their own parts; and my Lord declared that he would make such overtures in my behalf, as should render my marriage with Miss Harlowe the best day’s work I ever made; and what, he doubted not, would be as agreeable to that family as to myself.</p>
					<p>Thus, at present, by a single hair, hangs over my head the matrimonial sword. And thus ended my trial. And thus are we all friends, and Cousin and Cousin, and Nephew and Nephew, at every word.</p>
					<p>Did ever comedy end more happily than this long trial?</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
