<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter LXXIII: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-73" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday, <time datetime="07-11">July 11</time></p>
					</header>
					<p><em>Forgive you</em>, my dear!⁠—Most cordially do I forgive you⁠—Will you forgive me for some sharp things I wrote in return to yours of the <time datetime="06-05">5th</time>? You could not have loved me as you do, nor had the concern you have always shown for my honour, if you had not been utterly displeased with me, on the appearance which my conduct wore to you when you wrote that letter. I most heartily thank you, my best and only love, for the opportunity you gave me of clearing it up; and for being generously ready to acquit me of intentional blame, the moment you had read my melancholy narrative.</p>
					<p>As you are so earnest to have all the particulars of my sad story before you, I will, if life and spirits be lent me, give you an ample account of all that has befallen me, from the time you mention. But this, it is very probable, you will not see, till after the close of my last scene: and as I shall write with a view to that, I hope no other voucher will be wanted for the veracity of the writer, be who will the reader.</p>
					<p>I am far from thinking myself out of the reach of this man’s further violence. But what can I do? Whither can I fly?⁠—Perhaps my bad state of health (which must grow worse, as recollection of the past evils, and reflections upon them, grow heavier and heavier upon me) may be my protection. Once, indeed, I thought of going abroad; and, had I the prospect of many years before me, I would go.⁠—But, my dear, the blow is given.⁠—Nor have you reason now, circumstanced as I am, to be concerned that it is. What a heart must I have, if it be not broken⁠—and indeed, my <em>dear</em> friend, I do so earnestly wish for the last closing scene, and with so much comfort find myself in a declining way, that I even sometimes ungratefully regret that naturally-healthy constitution, which used to double upon me all my enjoyments.</p>
					<p>As to the earnestly-recommended prosecution, I may possibly touch upon it more largely hereafter, if ever I shall have better spirits; for they are at present extremely sunk and low. But just now, I will only say, that I would sooner suffer every evil (the repetition of the capital one excepted) than appear publicly in a court to do myself justice.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-279" id="noteref-279" epub:type="noteref">279</a> And I am heartily grieved that your mother prescribes such a measure as the condition of our future correspondence: for the continuance of your friendship, my dear, and the desire I had to correspond with you to my life’s end, were all my remaining hopes and consolation. Nevertheless, as that friendship is in the power of the <em>heart</em>, not of the <em>hand</em> only, I hope I shall not forfeit that.</p>
					<p>O my dear! what would I give to obtain a revocation of my father’s malediction! a reconciliation is not to be hoped for. You, who never loved my father, may think my solicitude on this head a weakness: but the <em>motive</em> for it, sunk as my spirits <em>at times</em> are, is not <em>always</em> weak.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>I approve of the method you prescribe for the conveyance of our letters; and have already caused the porter of the inn to be engaged to bring to me yours, the moment that Collins arrives with them. And the servant of the house where I am will be permitted to carry mine to Collins for you.</p>
					<p>I have written a letter to Miss Rawlins, of Hampstead; the answer to which, just now received, has helped me to the knowledge of the vile contrivance, by which the wicked man got your letter of <time datetime="06-10">June the 10th</time>. I will give you the contents of both.</p>
					<p>In mine to her, I briefly acquainted her “with what had befallen me, through the vileness of the women who had passed upon me as the aunt and cousin of the wickedest of men; and own, that I never was married to him. I desire her to make particular inquiry, and to let me know, who it was at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Moore’s that, on Sunday afternoon, <time datetime="06-11">June 11</time>, while I was at church, received a letter from Miss Howe, pretending to be me, and lying on a couch:⁠—which letter, had it come to my hands, would have saved me from ruin. I excuse myself (on the score of the delirium, which the horrid usage I had received threw me into, and from a confinement as barbarous as illegal) that I had not before applied to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Moore for an account of what I was indebted to her: which account I now desired. And, for fear of being traced by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, I directed her to superscribe her answer, To <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mary Atkins; to be left till called for, at the Belle Savage Inn, on Ludgate-hill.”</p>
					<p>In her answer, she tells me, “that the vile wretch prevailed upon <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bevis to personate me, (a sudden motion of his, it seems, on the appearance of your messenger), and persuaded her to lie along a couch: a handkerchief over her neck and face; pretending to be ill; the credulous woman drawn in by false notions of your ill offices to keep up a variance between a man and his wife⁠—and so taking the letter from your messenger as me.</p>
					<p>“Miss Rawlins takes pains to excuse <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bevis’s intention. She expresses their astonishment, and concern at what I communicate: but is glad, however, and so they are all, that they know in time the vileness of the base man; the two widows and herself having, at his earnest invitation, designed me a visit at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sinclair’s: supposing all to be happy between him and me; as he assured them was the case. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, she informs me, had handsomely satisfied <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Moore. And Miss Rawlins concludes with wishing to be favoured with the particulars of so extraordinary a story, as these particulars may be of use, to let her see what wicked creatures (women as well as men) there are in the world.”</p>
					<p>I thank you, my dear, for the draughts of your two letters which were intercepted by this horrid man. I see the great advantage they were of to him, in the prosecution of his villanous designs against the poor wretch whom he had so long made the sport of his abhorred inventions.</p>
					<p>Let me repeat, that I am quite sick of life; and of an earth, in which <em>innocent</em> and <em>benevolent</em> spirits are sure to be considered as <em>aliens</em>, and to be made sufferers by the <em>genuine sons</em> and <em>daughters</em> of <em>that earth</em>.</p>
					<p>How unhappy, that those letters only which could have acquainted me with his horrid views, and armed me against them, and against the vileness of the base women, should fall into his hands!⁠—Unhappier still, in that my very escape to Hampstead gave him the opportunity of receiving them.</p>
					<p>Nevertheless, I cannot but still wonder, how it was possible for that Tomlinson to know what passed between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman and my uncle Harlowe:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-280" id="noteref-280" epub:type="noteref">280</a> a circumstance which gave the vile impostor most of his credit with me.</p>
					<p>How the wicked wretch himself could find me out at Hampstead, must also remain wholly a mystery to me. He <em>may</em> glory in his contrivances⁠—he, who has more wickedness than wit, may glory in his contrivances!⁠—But, after all, I shall, I humbly presume to hope, be happy, when he, poor wretch, will be⁠—alas!⁠—who can say what!⁠—</p>
					<p>Adieu, my dearest friend!⁠—May you be happy!⁠—And then your Clarissa cannot be wholly miserable!</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
