<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter I: Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Wed. Night, <time datetime="1738-07-12">July 12</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>I write, my dearest creature, I cannot <em>but</em> write, to express my concern on your dejection. Let me beseech you, my charming excellence, let me beseech you, not to give way to it.</p>
					<p>Comfort yourself, on the contrary, in the triumphs of a virtue unsullied; a will wholly faultless. Who could have withstood the trials you have surmounted?⁠—Your cousin Morden will soon come. He will see justice done you, I make no doubt, as well with regard to what concerns your person as your estate. And many happy days may you yet see; and much good may you still do, if you will not heighten unavoidable accidents into guilty despondency.</p>
					<p>But why, why, my dear, this pining solicitude continued after a reconciliation with relations as unworthy as implacable; whose wills are governed by an all-grasping brother, who finds his account in keeping the breach open? On this over-solicitude it is now plain to me, that the vilest of men built all his schemes. He saw that you thirsted after it beyond all reason for hope. The view, the hope, I own, extremely desirable, had your family been Christians: or even had they been Pagans who had had bowels.</p>
					<p>I shall send this short letter (I am obliged to make it a short one) by <em>young</em> Rogers, as we call him; the fellow I sent to you to Hampstead; an innocent, though pragmatical rustic. Admit him, I pray you, into your presence, that he may report to me how you look, and how you are.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman should attend you; but I apprehend, that all his motions, and mine own too, are watched by the execrable wretch: and indeed his are by an agent of mine; for I own, that I am so apprehensive of his plots and revenge, now I know that he has intercepted my vehement letters against him, that he is the subject of my dreams, as well as of my waking fears.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>My mother, at my earnest importunity, has just given me leave to write, and to receive your letters⁠—but fastened this condition upon the concession, that yours must be under cover to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman, (this is a view, I suppose, to give him consideration with me); and upon this further consideration, that she is to see all we write.⁠—“When girls are set upon a point,” she told one who told me again, “it is better for a mother, if possible, to make herself of their party, than to oppose them; since there will be then hopes that she will still hold the reins in her own hands.”</p>
					<p>Pray let me know what the people are with whom you lodge?⁠—Shall I send <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Townsend to direct you to lodgings either more safe or more convenient for you?</p>
					<p>Be pleased to write to me by Rogers; who will wait on you for your answer, at your own time.</p>
					<p>Adieu, my dearest creature. Comfort <em>yourself</em>, as you would in the like unhappy circumstances comfort</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your own</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Anna Howe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
