<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter LII: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Mrs. Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-52" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Saturday, <time datetime="1738-07-01">July 1</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>Permit me, Madam, to trouble you with a few lines, were it only to thank you for your reproofs; which have nevertheless drawn fresh streams of blood from a bleeding heart.</p>
					<p>My story is a dismal story. It has circumstances in it that would engage pity, and possibly a judgment not altogether unfavourable, were those circumstances known. But it is my business, and shall be <em>all</em> my business, to repent of my failings, and not endeavour to extenuate them.</p>
					<p>Nor will I seek to distress your worthy mind. If <em>I cannot suffer alone</em>, I will make as few parties as I can in my sufferings. And, indeed, I took up my pen with this resolution when I wrote the letter which has fallen into your hands. It was only to know, and that for a very particular reason, as well as for affection unbounded, if my dear Miss Howe, from whom I had not heard of a long time, were ill; as I had been told she was; and if so, how she now does. But my injuries being recent, and my distresses having been exceeding great, <em>self</em> would crowd into my letter. When distressed, the human mind is apt to turn itself to everyone, in whom it imagined or wished an interest, for pity and consolation.⁠—Or, to express myself better, and more concisely, in your own words, <q>misfortune makes people plaintive</q>: And to whom, if not to a friend, can the afflicted complain?</p>
					<p>Miss Howe being abroad when my letter came, I flatter myself that she is recovered. But it would be some satisfaction to me to be informed if <em>she has been ill</em>. Another line from <em>your</em> hand would be too great a favour: but if you will be pleased to direct any servant to answer <em>yes</em>, or <em>no</em>, to that question, I will not be farther troublesome.</p>
					<p>Nevertheless, I must declare, that my Miss Howe’s friendship was all the comfort I had, or expected to have in this world; and a line from her would have been a cordial to my fainting heart. Judge then, dearest Madam, how reluctantly I must obey your prohibition⁠—but yet I will endeavour to obey it; although I should have hoped, as well from the tenor of all that has passed between Miss Howe and me, as from <em>her</em> established virtue, that she could not be tainted by <em>evil communication</em>, had one or two letters been permitted. This, however, I ask not for, since I think I have nothing to do but to beg of God (who, I hope, has not yet withdrawn his grace from me, although he has pleaded to let loose his justice upon my faults) to give me a truly broken spirit, if it be not already broken enough, and then to take to his mercy</p>
					<p>The unhappy</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:postscript">Two favours, good Madam, I have to beg of you.⁠—The first⁠—that you will not let any of my relations know that you have heard from me. The other⁠—that no living creature be apprised where I am to be heard of, or directed to. This is a point that concerns me more than I can express.⁠—In short, my preservation from further evils may depend upon it.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
