<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 80: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> and to the Ladies of His House</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-80" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> and to the Ladies of His House</span>
				</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p class="explanatory">In Reply to Miss Montague’s of <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 7. See Letter Lxxvi. of This Volume.</p>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday, <time datetime="1738-08-08"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 8</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>Excuse me, my good Lord, and my ever-honoured Ladies, from accepting of your noble quarterly bounty; and allow me to return, with all grateful acknowledgement, and true humility, the enclosed earnest of your goodness to me. Indeed I have no need of the one, and cannot possibly want the other: but, nevertheless have such a sense of your generous favour, that, to my last hour, I shall have pleasure in contemplating upon it, and be proud of the place I hold in the esteem of such venerable persons, to whom I once had the ambition to hope to be related.</p>
					<p>But give me leave to express my concern that you have banished your kinsman from your presence and favour: since now, perhaps, he will be under less restraint than ever; and since I in particular, who had hoped by your influence to remain unmolested for the remainder of my days, may again be subjected to his persecutions.</p>
					<p>He has not, my good Lord, and my dear Ladies, offended against <em>you</em>, as he has against <em>me</em>; yet you could all very generously intercede for him with <em>me</em>: and shall I be <em>very</em> improper, if I desire, for my own peace-sake; for the sake of other poor creatures, who may still be injured by him, if he be made quite desperate; and for the sake of all your worthy family; that you will extend to <em>him</em> that forgiveness which you hope for from <em>me</em>? and this the rather, as I presume to think, that his daring and impetuous spirit will not be subdued by violent methods; since I have no doubt that the gratifying of a present passion will be always more prevalent with him than any future prospects, however unwarrantable the one, or beneficial the other.</p>
					<p>Your resentments on my account are extremely generous, as your goodness to me is truly noble: but I am not without hope that he will be properly affected by the evils he has made me suffer; and that, when I am laid low and forgotten, your whole honourable family will be enabled to rejoice in his reformation; and see many of those happy years together, which, my good Lord, and my dear Ladies, you so kindly wish to</p>
					<p>Your ever-grateful and obliged Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
