<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter LXXVIII: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-78" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p class="explanatory">[In answer to Letter LXV of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>]</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Monday, <time datetime="08-07"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 7</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>And so you have actually delivered to the fair implacable extracts of letters written in the confidence of friendship! Take care⁠—take care, Belford⁠—I do indeed love you better than I love any man in the world: but this is a very delicate point. The matter is grown very serious to me. My heart is bent upon having her. And have her I will, though I marry her in the agonies of death.</p>
					<p>She is very earnest, you say, that I will not offer to molest her. <em>That</em>, let me tell her, will absolutely depend upon herself, and the answer she returns, whether by pen and ink, or the contemptuous one of silence, which she bestowed upon my last four to her: and I will write it in such humble, and in such reasonable terms, that, if she be not a true Harlowe, she <em>shall</em> forgive me. But as to the <em>executorship</em> which she is for conferring upon thee⁠—thou shalt not be her <em>executor</em>: let me perish if thou shalt.⁠—Nor shall she die. Nobody shall be anything, nobody shall <em>dare</em> to be anything, to her, but I⁠—thy happiness is already too great, to be admitted daily to her presence; to look upon her, to talk to her, to hear her talk, while I am forbid to come within view of her window⁠—What a reprobation is this, of the man who was once more dear to her than all the men in the world!⁠—And now to be able to look down upon me, while her exalted head is hid from me among the stars, sometimes with scorn, at other times with pity; I cannot bear it.</p>
					<p>This I tell thee, that if I have not success in my effort by letter, I will overcome the creeping folly that has found its way to my heart, or I will tear it out in her presence, and throw it at hers, that she may see how much more tender than her own that organ is, which she, and you, and everyone else, have taken the liberty to call callous.</p>
					<p>Give notice of the people who live back and edge, and on either hand, of the cursed mother, to remove their best effects, if I am rejected: for the first vengeance I shall take will be to set fire to that den of serpents. Nor will there be any fear of taking them when they are in any act that has the <q>relish of salvation in it</q>, as Shakespeare says⁠—so that my revenge, if they perish in the flames I shall light up, will be complete as to them.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
