<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 66: Mr. Brand, to John Harlowe, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-66" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXVI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brand, to John Harlowe, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></span>
				</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sat. Night, <time datetime="1738-09-02"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 2</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>Worthy Sir,</p>
					<p>I am under no <strong>small concern</strong>, that I should (unhappily) be the <strong>occasion</strong> (I am sure I <strong>intended</strong> nothing like it) of <strong>widening differences</strong> by <strong>light misreport</strong>, when it is the <strong>duty</strong> of one of <strong>my function</strong> (and no less consisting with my <strong>inclination</strong>) to <strong>heal</strong> and <strong>reconcile</strong>.</p>
					<p>I have received two letter to set me <strong>right</strong>: one from a <strong>particular acquaintance</strong>, (whom I set to inquire of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford’s character); and that came on Tuesday last, informing me, that your <strong>unhappy niece</strong> was greatly injured in the account I had had of her; (for I had told <strong>him</strong> of it, and that with very <strong>great concern</strong>, I am sure, apprehending it to be <strong>true</strong>.) So I <strong>then</strong> set about writing to you, to <strong>acknowledge</strong> the <strong>error</strong>. And had gone a good way in it, when the second letter came (a very <strong>handsome one</strong> it is, both in <strong>style</strong> and <strong>penmanship</strong>) from my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Walton, (though I am sure it cannot be <strong>his inditing</strong>,) expressing his sorrow, and his wife’s, and his sister-in-law’s likewise, for having been the cause of <strong>misleading me</strong>, in the account I gave of the said <strong>young lady</strong>; whom they <strong>now</strong> say (upon <strong>further inquiry</strong>) they find to be the <strong>most unblameable</strong>, and <strong>most prudent</strong>, and (it seems) the most <strong>pious</strong> young lady, that ever (once) committed a <strong>great error</strong>; as (to be sure) <strong>her</strong>s was,” in leaving such <strong>worthy parents</strong> and <strong>relations</strong> for so <strong>vile a man</strong> as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace; but what shall we say?⁠—Why, the divine Virgil tells us,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Improbe amor, quid non mortalia pectora cogis?</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>For <strong>my part</strong>, I was but too much afraid (for we have <strong>great opportunities)</strong>, you are sensible, Sir, at the <strong>University</strong>, of knowing <strong>human nature</strong> from <strong>books</strong>, the <strong>calm result</strong> of the <strong>wise man</strong>s wisdom,” as I may say,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>(Haurit aquam cribro, qui discere vult sine libro)</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><strong>uninterrupted</strong> by the <strong>noise</strong> and <strong>vanities</strong> that will mingle with <strong>personal conversation</strong>, which (in the <strong>turbulent world</strong>) is not to be enjoyed but over a <strong>bottle</strong>, where you have an <strong>hundred foolish things</strong> pass to <strong>one that deserveth to be remembered</strong>; I was but too much afraid <strong>I say</strong>, that so <strong>great a slip</strong> might be attended with <strong>still greater</strong> and <strong>worse</strong>: for <strong>your</strong> Horace, and <strong>my</strong> Horace, the most charming writer that ever lived among the <strong>Pagans</strong> (for the <strong>lyric kind of poetry</strong>, I mean; for, the be sure, <strong>Homer</strong> and <strong>Virgil</strong> would <strong>otherwise</strong> be <strong>first</strong> named <strong>in their way</strong>) well observeth (and who understood <strong>human nature</strong> better than he?)</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Nec vera virtus, cum semel excidit, Curat reponi deterioribus.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>And <strong>Ovid</strong> no less wisely observeth:</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Et mala sunt vicina bonis. Errore sub illo Pro vitio virtus crimina saepe tulit.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Who, that can draw <strong>knowledge</strong> from its <strong>fountainhead</strong>, the works of the <strong>sages of antiquity</strong>, (improved by the <strong>comments</strong> of the <strong>moderns</strong>,) but would <strong>prefer</strong> to all others the <strong>silent quiet life</strong>, which <strong>contemplative men</strong> lead in the <strong>seats of learning</strong>, were they not called out (according to their <strong>dedication</strong>) to the <strong>service</strong> and <strong>instruction</strong> of the world?</p>
					<p>Now, Sir, <strong>another</strong> favourite poet of mine (and not the <strong>less a favourite</strong> for being a <strong>Christian</strong>) telleth us, that ill is the custom of <strong>some</strong>, when in a <strong>fault</strong>, to throw the blame upon the backs of <strong>others</strong>,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>“⁠—Hominum quoque mos est, Quae nos cunque premunt, alieno imponere tergo.” Mant.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>But I, though (in this case) <strong>misled</strong>, (<strong>well intendedly</strong>, nevertheless, both in the <strong>misleaders</strong> and <strong>misled</strong>, and therefore entitled to lay hold of that plea, if <strong>anybody</strong> is so entitled,) will not however, be classed among such <strong>extenuators</strong>; but (contrarily) will always keep in mind that verse, which <strong>comforteth in mistake</strong>, as well as <strong>instructeth</strong>; and which I quoted in my last letter;</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Errare est hominis, sed non persistere⁠—</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>And will own, that I was very <strong>rash</strong> to take up with <strong>conjectures</strong> and <strong>consequences</strong> drawn from <strong>probabilites</strong>, where (especially) the <strong>character</strong> of so <strong>fine a lady</strong> was concerned.</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>“Credere fallacy gravis est dementia famae.” Mant.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Notwithstanding, Miss Clarissa Harlowe (I must be bold to say) is the <strong>only young lady</strong>, that ever I heard of (or indeed read of) that, <strong>having made such a false step</strong>, so <strong>soon</strong> (of <strong>her own accord</strong>, as I may say) <strong>recovered</strong> herself, and conquered her <strong>love of the deceiver</strong>; (a great conquest indeed!) and who flieth him, and resolveth to <strong>die</strong>, rather than to be his; which now, to her never-dying <strong>honour</strong> (I am well assured) is the case⁠—and, in <strong>justice</strong> to her, I am now ready to take to myself (with no small vexation) that of Ovid,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Heu! patior telis vulnera facta meis.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>But yet I do insist upon it, that all <strong>that part</strong> of my <strong>information</strong>, which I took upon mine own <strong>personal inquiry</strong>, which is what relates to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <strong>Belford</strong> and <strong>his character</strong>, is <strong>literally true</strong>; for there is not anywhere to be met with a man of a more <strong>libertine character</strong> as to <strong>women</strong>, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <strong>Lovelace</strong> excepted, than he beareth.</p>
					<p>And so, Sir, I must desire of you, that you will not let <strong>any blame</strong> lie upon my <strong>intention</strong>; since you see how ready I am to <strong>accuse myself</strong> of too lightly giving ear to a <strong>rash information</strong> (not knowing it to be so, however): for I depended the more upon it, as the <strong>people I had it from</strong> are very <strong>sober</strong>, and live in the <strong>fear of God</strong>: and indeed when I wait upon you, you will see by their letter, that they must be <strong>conscientious</strong> good people: wherefore, Sir, let me be entitled, from <strong>all your good family</strong>, to that of my last-named poet,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Aspera confesso verba remitte reo.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>And now, Sir, (what is much more becoming of my <strong>function</strong>,) let me, instead of appearing with the <strong>face of an accuser</strong>, and a <strong>rash censurer</strong>, (which in my <strong>heart</strong> I have not <strong>deserved</strong> to be thought,) assume the character of a <strong>reconciler</strong>; and propose (by way of <strong>penance</strong> to myself for my <strong>fault</strong>) to be sent up as a <strong>messenger of peace</strong> to the <strong>pious young lady</strong>; for they write me word <strong>absolutely</strong> (and, I believe in my heart, <strong>truly</strong>) that the <strong>doctors</strong> have <strong>given her over</strong>, and that she <strong>cannot live</strong>. Alas! alas! what a sad thing would that be, if the <strong>poor bough</strong>, that was only designed (as I <strong>very well know</strong>, and am <strong>fully assured</strong>) <strong>to be bent, should be broken!</strong></p>
					<p>Let it not, dear Sir, seem to the <strong>world</strong> that there was anything in your <strong>resentments</strong> (which, while meant for <strong>reclaiming</strong>, were just and fit) that hath the <strong>appearance</strong> of <strong>violence</strong>, and <strong>fierce wrath</strong>, and <strong>inexorability</strong>; (as it would look to some, if carried to extremity, after <strong>repentance</strong> and <strong>contrition</strong>, and <strong>humiliation</strong>, on the <strong>fair offender</strong>s<strong> side:) for all this while (it seemeth) she hat been a “second Magdalen</strong> in her <strong>penitence</strong>, and yet not so bad as a <strong>Magdalen</strong> in her <strong>faults</strong>; (faulty, nevertheless, as she hath been once, the Lord knoweth!</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>“Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur: optimus ille est, Qui minimis urgentur’⁠—saith Horace).</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Now, Sir, if I may be named for this <strong>blessed</strong> employment, (for, <strong>Blessed is the peacemaker!</strong>) I will hasten to London; and (as I know Miss had always a <strong>great regard</strong> to the <strong>function</strong> I have the honour to be of) I have no doubt of making myself acceptable to her, and to bring her, by <strong>sound arguments</strong>, and <strong>good advice</strong>, into a <strong>liking of life</strong>, which must be the <strong>first step</strong> to her <strong>recovery</strong>: for, when the <strong>mind</strong> is <strong>made easy</strong>, the <strong>body</strong> will not <strong>long suffer</strong>; and the <strong>love of life</strong> is a <strong>natural passion</strong>, that is soon <strong>revived</strong>, when fortune turneth about, and smileth:</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>“Vivere quisque diu, quamvis &amp; egenus &amp; ager, Optat.⁠—” Ovid.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>And the sweet Lucan truly observeth,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Fatis debentibus annos Mors invita subit.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>And now, Sir, let me tell you what shall be the <strong>tenor</strong> of my <strong>pleadings</strong> with her, and <strong>comfortings</strong> of her, as she is, as I may say, a <strong>learned lady</strong>; and as I can <strong>explain</strong> to her <strong>those sentences</strong>, which she cannot so readily <strong>construe herself</strong>: and this in order to convince <strong>you</strong> (did you not already <strong>know</strong> my <strong>qualifications</strong>) how well qualified I <strong>am</strong> for the <strong>christian office</strong> to which I commend myself.</p>
					<p>I will, in the <strong>First Place</strong>, put her in mind of the <strong>common course of things</strong> in this <strong>sublunary world</strong>, in which <strong>joy</strong> and <strong>sorrow, sorrow</strong> and joy,” succeed one another by turns’; in order to convince her, that her griefs have been but according to <strong>that</strong> common course of things:</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Gaudia post luctus veniunt, post gaudia luctus.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><strong>Secondly</strong>, I will remind her of her own notable description of <strong>sorrow</strong>, whence she was once called upon to distinguish wherein <strong>sorrow, grief</strong>, and <strong>melancholy</strong>, differed from each other; which she did <strong>impromptu</strong>, by their <strong>effects</strong>, in a truly admirable manner, to the high satisfaction of everyone: I myself could not, by <strong>study</strong>, have distinguished <strong>better</strong>, nor more <strong>concisely</strong>⁠—<strong>Sorrow</strong>, said she, <strong>wears</strong>; <strong>grief</strong> <strong>tears</strong>; but <strong>melancholy</strong> <strong>sooths</strong>.</p>
					<p>My inference to her shall be, that since a happy reconciliation will take place, <strong>grief</strong> will be banished; <strong>sorrow</strong> dismissed; and only sweet <strong>melancholy</strong> remain to <strong>sooth</strong> and <strong>indulge</strong> her contrite <strong>heart</strong>, and show to all the world the penitent sense she hath of her great error.</p>
					<p><strong>Thirdly</strong>, That her <strong>joys</strong>,* when restored to health and favour, will be the greater, the deeper her griefs were.</p>
					<p class="footnote">* <strong>Joy</strong>, let me here observe, my dear Sir, by way of note, is not absolutely inconsistent with <strong>melancholy</strong>; a <strong>soft gentle joy</strong>, not a <strong>rapid</strong>, not a <strong>rampant joy</strong>, however; but such a <strong>joy</strong>, as shall lift her <strong>temporarily</strong> out of her <strong>soothing melancholy</strong>, and then <strong>let her down gently</strong> into it again; for <strong>melancholy</strong>, to be sure, her <strong>reflection</strong> will generally make to be her state.</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Gaudia, quae multo parta labore, placent.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><strong>Fourthly</strong>, That having <strong>really</strong> been guilty of a <strong>great error</strong>, she should not take <strong>impatiently</strong> the <strong>correction</strong> and <strong>anger</strong> with which she hath been treated.</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Leniter, ex merito quicquid patiare ferundum est.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><strong>Fifthly</strong>, That <strong>virtue</strong> must be established by <strong>patience</strong>; as saith Prudentius:</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Haec virtus vidua est, quam non patientia firmat.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><strong>Sixthly</strong>, That in the words of Horace, she may <strong>expect better times</strong>, than (of late) she had <strong>reason</strong> to look for.</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Grata superveniet, quae non sperabitur, hora.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><strong>Seventhly</strong>, That she is really now in <strong>a way</strong> to be <strong>happy</strong>, since, according to <strong>Ovid</strong>, she <strong>can count up all her woe</strong>:</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Felix, qui patitur quae numerare potest.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>And those comforting lines,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Estque serena dies post longos gratior imbres, Et post triste malum gratior ipsa salus.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><strong>Eighthly</strong>, That, in the words of Mantuan, her <strong>parents</strong> and <strong>uncles</strong> could not <strong>help loving her</strong> all the time they were <strong>angry at her</strong>:</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Aequa tamen mens est, &amp; amica voluntas, Sit licet in natos austere parentum.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><strong>Ninthly</strong>, That the <strong>ills she hath met with</strong> may be turned (by the <strong>good use</strong> to be made of them) to her <strong>everlasting benefit</strong>; for that,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Cum furit atque ferit, Deus olim parcere quaerit.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><strong>Tenthly</strong>, That she will be able to give a <strong>fine lesson</strong> (a <strong>very</strong> fine lesson) to all the <strong>young ladies</strong> of her <strong>acquaintance</strong>, of the <strong>vanity</strong> of being <strong>lifted up</strong> in <strong>prosperity</strong>, and the <strong>weakness</strong> of being <strong>cast down</strong> in <strong>adversity</strong>; since no one is so <strong>high</strong>, as to be above being <strong>humbled</strong>; so <strong>low</strong>, as to <strong>need to despair</strong>: for which purpose the advice of <strong>Ausonius</strong>,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Dum fortuna juvat, caveto tolli: Dum fortuna tonat, caveto mergi.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>I shall tell her, that Lucan saith well, when he calleth <strong>adversity the element of patience</strong>;</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>—Gaudet patientia duris:</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>That</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Fortunam superat virtus, prudential famam.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>That while weak souls are <strong>crushed by fortune</strong>, the <strong>brave mind</strong> maketh the fickle deity afraid of it:</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Fortuna fortes metuit, ignavos permit.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><strong>Eleventhly</strong>, That if she take the advice of <strong>Horace</strong>,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Fortiaque adversis opponite pectora rebus,</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>it will delight her <strong>hereafter</strong> (as <strong>Virgil</strong> saith) to <strong>revoke her past troubles</strong>:</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>—Forsan &amp; haec olim meminisse juvabit.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>And, to the same purpose, <strong>Juvenal</strong> speaking of the <strong>prating joy</strong> of mariners, after all their <strong>dangers are over</strong>:</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Gaudent securi narrare pericula nautae.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Which suiting the case so well, you’ll forgive me, Sir, for <strong>popping down</strong> in <strong>English metre</strong>, as the <strong>translative impulse</strong> (pardon a new word, and yet we <strong>scholars</strong> are not fond of <strong>authenticating new</strong> words) came upon me <strong>uncalled for</strong>:</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>The seaman, safe on shore, with joy doth tell What cruel dangers him at sea befell.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>With <strong>these</strong>, Sir, and an <strong>hundred more</strong> wise <strong>adages</strong>, which I have always at my <strong>fingers</strong> end,” will I (when reduced to <strong>form</strong> and <strong>method</strong>) entertain Miss; and as she is a <strong>well-read</strong>, and (I might say, but for this <strong>one</strong> great error) a <strong>wise</strong> young lady, I make no doubt but I shall <strong>prevail</strong> upon her, if not by <strong>mine own arguments</strong>, by those of <strong>wits</strong> and <strong>capacities</strong> that have a <strong>congeniality</strong> (as I may say) to <strong>her own</strong>, to take to heart,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>—Nor of the laws of fate complain, Since, though it has been cloudy, now’t clears up again.⁠—</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Oh! what <strong>wisdom</strong> is there in these <strong>noble classical authors!</strong> A <strong>wise man</strong> will (upon searching into them,) always find that they speak <strong>his</strong> sense of <strong>men</strong> and <strong>things</strong>. Hence it is, that they so readily occur to my <strong>memory</strong> on every occasion⁠—though this may look like <strong>vanity</strong>, it is too true to be omitted; and I see not why a man may not <strong>know these things of himself</strong>, which <strong>everybody</strong> seeth and <strong>saith of him</strong>; who, nevertheless, perhaps know not <strong>half so much as he</strong>, in other matters.</p>
					<p>I know but of <strong>one objection</strong>, Sir, that can lie against my going; and that will arise from your kind <strong>care</strong> and <strong>concern</strong> for the <strong>safety of my person</strong>, in case that <strong>fierce</strong> and <strong>terrible man</strong>, the wicked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, (of whom everyone standeth in fear,) should come cross me, as he may be resolved to try once more to <strong>gain a footing in Miss</strong>s affections’: but I will trust in <strong>Providence</strong> for <strong>my safety</strong>, while I shall be engaged in a <strong>cause so worthy of my function</strong>; and the <strong>more</strong> trust in it, as he is a <strong>learned man</strong> as I am told.</p>
					<p>Strange too, that so <strong>vile a rake</strong> (I hope he will never see this!) should be a <strong>learned man</strong>; that is to say, that a <strong>learned man</strong> may be a <strong>sly sinner</strong>, and take opportunities, <strong>as they come in his way</strong>⁠—which, however, I do assure you, <strong>I never did</strong>,</p>
					<p>I repeat, that as he is a <strong>learned man</strong>, I shall <strong>vest myself</strong>, as I may say, in <strong>classical armour</strong>; beginning <strong>meekly</strong> with him (for, Sir, <strong>bravery</strong> and <strong>meekness</strong> are qualities <strong>very consistent with each other</strong>, and in no persons so shiningly <strong>exert</strong> themselves, as in the <strong>Christian priesthood</strong>; beginning <strong>meekly</strong> with him, I say) from Ovid,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Corpora magnanimo satis est protrasse leoni:</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>So that, if I should not be safe behind the <strong>shield of mine own prudence</strong>, I certainly should be behind the <strong>shields</strong> of the <strong>ever-admirable classics</strong>: of <strong>Horace</strong> particularly; who, being a <strong>rake</strong> (and a <strong>jovial rake</strong> too,) himself, must have great weight with all <strong>learned rakes</strong>.</p>
					<p>And who knoweth but I may be able to bring even this <strong>Goliath in wickedness</strong>, although in <strong>person</strong> but a <strong>little David</strong> myself, (armed with the <strong>slings</strong> and <strong>stones</strong> of the <strong>ancient sages</strong>,) to a due sense of his errors? And what a victory would that be!</p>
					<p>I could here, Sir, pursuing the allegory of David and Goliath, give you some of the <strong>stones</strong> (<strong>hard arguments</strong> may be called <strong>stones</strong>, since they <strong>knock down a pertinacious opponent</strong>) which I could <strong>pelt him with</strong>, were he to be wroth with me; and this in order to take from you, Sir, all apprehensions for my <strong>life</strong>, or my <strong>bones</strong>; but I forbear them till you demand them of me, when I have the honour to attend you in person.</p>
					<p>And now, (my dear Sir,) what remaineth, but that having shown you (what yet, I believe, you did not doubt) how <strong>well qualified</strong> I am to attend the lady with the <strong>olive-branch</strong>, I beg of you to dispatch me with it <strong>out of hand</strong>? For if she be so <strong>very ill</strong>, and if she should not live to receive the grace, which (to my knowledge) all the <strong>worthy family</strong> design her, how much will that grieve you all! And then, Sir, of what avail will be the <strong>eulogies</strong> you shall all, peradventure, join to give to her memory? For, as Martial wisely observeth,</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>—Post cineres gloria sera venit.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Then, as <strong>Ausonius</strong> layeth it down with <strong>equal propriety</strong>, that <strong>those favours which are speedily conferred are the most grateful and obliging</strong>⁠—</p>
					<p>And to the same purpose Ovid:</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Gratia ab officio, quod mora tar dat, abest.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>And, Sir, whatever you do, let the <strong>lady</strong>s pardon’ be as <strong>ample</strong>, and as <strong>cheerfully given</strong>, as she can <strong>wish for it</strong>: that I may be able to tell her, that it hath your <strong>hands</strong>, your <strong>countenances</strong>, and your <strong>whole hearts</strong>, with it⁠—for, as the Latin verse hath it, (and I presume to think I have not weakened its sense by my humble advice),</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Dat bene, dat multum, qui dat cum munere vultum.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>And now, Sir, when I survey this long letter,* (albeit I see it enamelled, as a <strong>beautiful meadow</strong> is enamelled by the <strong>spring</strong> or <strong>summer</strong> flowers, very glorious to behold!) I begin to be afraid that I may have tired you; and the more likely, as I have written without that <strong>method</strong> or <strong>order</strong>, which I think constituteth the <strong>beauty</strong> of <strong>good writing</strong>: which <strong>method</strong> or <strong>order</strong>, nevertheless, may be the <strong>better excused</strong> in a <strong>familiar epistle</strong>, (as this may be called,) you pardoning, Sir, the <strong>familiarity</strong> of the <strong>word</strong>; but yet not altogether <strong>here</strong>, I must needs own; because this is <strong>a letter</strong> and <strong>not a letter</strong>, as I may say; but a kind of <strong>short</strong> and <strong>pithy discourse</strong>, touching upon <strong>various</strong> and <strong>sundry topics</strong>, every one of which might be a <strong>fit theme</strong> to enlarge upon of volumes; if this <strong>epistolary discourse</strong> (then let me call it) should be pleasing to you, (as I am inclined to think it will, because of the <strong>sentiments</strong> and <strong>aphorisms</strong> of the <strong>wisest of the antients</strong>, which <strong>glitter through it</strong> like so many dazzling <strong>sunbeams</strong>,) I will (at my leisure) work it up into a <strong>methodical discourse</strong>; and perhaps may one day print it, with a <strong>dedication</strong> to my <strong>honoured patron</strong>, (if, Sir, I have <strong>your</strong> leave,) <strong>singly</strong> at first, (but not till I have thrown out <strong>anonymously</strong>, two or three <strong>smaller things</strong>, by the success of which I shall have made myself of <strong>some account</strong> in the <strong>commonwealth of letters</strong>,) and afterwards in my <strong>works</strong>⁠—not for the <strong>vanity</strong> of the thing (however) I will say, but for the <strong>use</strong> it may be of to the <strong>public</strong>; for, (as one well observeth,) <strong>though glory always followeth virtue, yet it should be considered only as its shadow</strong>.</p>
					<p class="footnote">* And here, by way of note, permit me to say, that no <strong>sermon</strong> I ever composed cost me half the <strong>pains</strong> that this letter hath done⁠—but I knew your great <strong>appetite</strong> after, as well as <strong>admiration</strong> of, the <strong>antient wisdom</strong>, which you so justly prefer to the <strong>modern</strong>⁠—and indeed I join with you to think, that the <strong>modern</strong> is only <strong>borrowed</strong>, (as the <strong>moon</strong> doth its light from the <strong>sun</strong>,) at least, that we <strong>excel</strong> them in nothing; and that our <strong>best cogitations</strong> may be found, generally speaking, more <strong>elegantly</strong> dressed and expressed by them.</p>
					<blockquote class="quotation">
						<p>Contemnit laudem virtus, licet usque sequatur Gloria virtutem, corpus ut umbra suum.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>A very pretty saying, and worthy of all men’s admiration.</p>
					<p>And now, (<strong>most worthy Sir</strong>, my very good friend and patron,) referring the whole to <strong>your</strong>s,” and to your <strong>two brothers</strong>, and to <strong>young <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harlowe</strong>s<strong> consideration, and to the wise consideration of good “Madam Harlowe</strong>, and her excellent daughter, <strong>Miss Arabella Harlowe</strong>; I take the liberty to subscribe myself, what I <strong>truly am</strong>, and <strong>every shall delight to be</strong>, in <strong>all cases</strong>, and at <strong>all times</strong>,</p>
					<p>Your and their most ready and obedient as well as faithful servant, Elias Brand.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
