<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter LXIII: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-63" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Wed. <abbr>Morn.</abbr> <time datetime="1738-09-06"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 6</time>, half an hour after Three</p>
					</header>
					<p>I am <em>not</em> the savage which you and my worst enemies think me. My soul is <em>too much</em> penetrated by the contents of the letter which you enclosed in your last, to say one word more to it, than that my heart has bled over it from every vein!⁠—I will fly from the subject⁠—but what other can I choose, that will not be as grievous, and lead into the same?</p>
					<p>I could quarrel with all the world; with thee, as well as the rest; obliging as thou supposest thyself for writing to me hourly. How darest thou, (though unknown to her,) to presume to take an apartment under the sane roof with her?⁠—I cannot bear to think that thou shouldest be seen, at all hours passing to and repassing from her apartments, while I, who have so much reason to call her mine, and one was preferred by her to all the world, am forced to keep aloof, and hardly dare to enter the <em>city</em> where she is!</p>
					<p>If there be anything in Brand’s letter that will divert me, hasten it to me. But nothing now will ever divert me, will ever again give me joy or pleasure! I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep. I am sick of all the world.</p>
					<p>Surely it will be better when <em>all is over</em>⁠—when I know the <em>worst</em> the Fates can do against me⁠—yet how shall I bear that <em>worst</em>?⁠—O Belford, Belford! write it not to me!⁠—But if it <em>must</em> happen, get somebody else to write; for I shall curse the pen, the hand, the head, and the heart, employed in communicating to me the fatal tidings. But what is this saying, when already I curse the whole world except her⁠—myself most?</p>
					<p>In fine, I am a most miserable being. Life is a burden to me. I would not bear it upon these terms for one week more, let what would be my lot; for already is there a hell begun in my own mind. Never more mention it to me, let <em>her</em>, or who will say it, the <em>prison</em>⁠—I cannot bear it⁠—May d⁠⸺⁠n⁠—⁠n seize quick the cursed woman, who could set death upon taking that <em>large stride</em>, as the dear creature calls it!⁠—I had no hand in it!⁠—But her relations, her implacable relations, have done the business. All else would have been got over. Never persuade me but it would. The <em>fire of youth</em>, and the <em>violence of passion</em>, would have pleaded for me to good purpose, with an individual of a sex, which loves to be addressed with passionate ardour, even to tumult, had it not been for that cruelty and unforgivingness, which, (the object and the penitence considered,) have no example, and have aggravated the heinousness of my faults.</p>
					<p>Unable to rest, though I went not to bed till two, I dispatch this ere the day dawn⁠—who knows what this night, this dismal night, may have produced!</p>
					<p>I must after my messenger. I have told the varlet I will meet him, perhaps at Knightsbridge, perhaps in Piccadilly; and I trust not myself with pistols, not only on his account, but my own⁠—for pistols are <em>too ready</em> a mischief.</p>
					<p>I hope thou hast a letter ready for him. He goes to thy lodgings first⁠—for surely thou wilt not presume to take thy rest in an apartment near hers. If he miss thee there, he flies to Smith’s, and brings me word whether in being, or not.</p>
					<p>I shall look for him through the air as I ride, as well as on horseback; for if the prince of it serve <em>me</em>, as well as I have served <em>him</em>, he will bring the dog by his ears, like another Habakkuk, to my saddlebow, with the tidings that my heart pants after.</p>
					<p>Nothing but the excruciating pangs the condemned soul fells, at its entrance into the eternity of the torments we are taught to fear, can exceed what I <em>now</em> feel, and <em>have</em> felt for almost this week past; and mayest thou have a spice of those, if thou hast not a letter ready written for thy</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Lovelace.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
