<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter XI: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-5-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Monday, <time datetime="06-05">June 5</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>I am now almost in despair of succeeding with this charming frost-piece by love or gentleness.⁠—A copy of the draughts, as I told thee, has been sent to Captain Tomlinson; and that by a special messenger. Engrossments are proceeding with. I have been again at the Commons.⁠—Should in all probability have procured a license by Mallory’s means, had not Mallory’s friend, the proctor, been suddenly sent for to Chestnut, to make an old lady’s will. Pritchard has told me by word of mouth, <em>though my charmer saw him not</em>, all that was necessary for her to know in the letter my Lord wrote, which I could not show her: and taken my directions about the estates to be made over to me on my nuptials.⁠—Yet, with all these favourable appearances, no conceding moment to be found, no improvable tenderness to be raised.</p>
					<p>But never, I believe, was there so true, so delicate a modesty in the human mind as in that of this lady. And this has been my security all along; and, in spite of Miss Howe’s advice to her, will be so still; since, if her delicacy be a fault, she can no more overcome it than I can my aversion to matrimony. Habit, habit, Jack, seest thou not? may subject us both to weaknesses. And should she not have charity for me, as I have for her?</p>
					<p>Twice indeed with rapture, which once she called rude, did I salute her; and each time resenting the freedom, did she retire; though, to do her justice, she favoured me again with her presence at my first entreaty, and took no notice of the cause of her withdrawing.</p>
					<p>Is it policy to show so open a resentment for innocent liberties, which, in her situation, she must so soon forgive?</p>
					<p><em>Yet the woman who resents not initiatory freedoms must be lost.</em> For love is an encroacher. Love never goes backward. Love is always aspiring. Always <em>must</em> aspire. Nothing but the highest act of love can satisfy an indulged love. And what advantages has a lover, who values not breaking the peace, over his mistress who is solicitous to keep it!</p>
					<p>I have now at this instant wrought myself up, for the dozenth time, to a half-resolution. A thousand agreeable things I have to say to her. She is in the dining-room. Just gone up. She always expects me when there.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>High displeasure!⁠—followed by an abrupt departure.</p>
					<p>I sat down by her. I took both her hands in mine. I would <em>have</em> it so. All gentle my voice. Her father mentioned with respect. Her mother with reverence. Even her brother amicably spoken of. I never thought I could have wished so ardently, as I told her I did wish, for a reconciliation with her family.</p>
					<p>A sweet and grateful flush then overspread her fair face; a gentle sigh now-and-then heaved her handkerchief.</p>
					<p>I perfectly longed to hear from Captain Tomlinson. It was impossible for the uncle to find fault with the draught of the settlements. I would not, however, be understood, by sending them down, that I intended to put it in her uncle’s power to delay my happy day. When, when was it to be?</p>
					<p>I would hasten again to the Commons; and would not return without the license.</p>
					<p>The Lawn I proposed to retire to, as soon as the happy ceremony was over. This day and that day I proposed.</p>
					<p>It was time enough to name the day, when the settlements were completed, and the license obtained. Happy should she be, could the kind Captain Tomlinson obtain her <q>uncle’s presence privately</q>.</p>
					<p>A good hint!⁠—It may perhaps be improved upon⁠—either for a <em>delay</em> or a <em>pacifier</em>.</p>
					<p>No new delays for Heaven’s sake, I besought her; and reproached her gently for the past. Name but the day⁠—(an <em>early</em> day, I hoped it would be, in the following week)⁠—that I might hail its approach, and number the tardy hours.</p>
					<p>My cheek reclined on her shoulder⁠—kissing her hands by turns. Rather bashfully than angrily reluctant, her hands sought to be withdrawn; her shoulder avoiding my reclined cheek⁠—apparently loth, and more loth to quarrel with me; her downcast eye confessing more than her lips can utter. Now surely, thought I, is my time to try if she can forgive a still bolder freedom than I had ever yet taken.</p>
					<p>I then gave her struggling hands liberty. I put one arm round her waist: I imprinted a kiss on her sweet lip, with a <q>Be quiet</q> only, and an averted face, as if she feared another.</p>
					<p><em>Encouraged by so gentle a repulse</em>, the tenderest things I said; and then, with my other hand, drew aside the handkerchief that concealed the beauty of beauties, and pressed with my burning lips the most charming breast that ever my ravished eyes beheld.</p>
					<p>A very contrary passion to that which gave her bosom so delightful a swell, immediately took place. She struggled out of my encircling arms with indignation. I detained her reluctant hand. Let me go, said she. <q>I see there is no keeping terms with you.</q> Base encroacher! Is this the design of your flattering speeches? Far as matters have gone, I will forever renounce you. You have an odious heart. Let me go, I tell you.</p>
					<p>I was forced to obey, and she flung from me, repeating <em>base</em>, and adding <em>flattering</em>, encroacher.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>In vain have I urged by Dorcas for the promised favour of dining with her. She would not dine <em>at all</em>. She <em>could not</em>.</p>
					<p>But why makes she every inch of her person thus sacred?⁠—So near the time too, that she must suppose, that all will be my own by deed of purchase and settlement?</p>
					<p>She has read, no doubt, of the art of the eastern monarchs, who sequester themselves from the eyes of their subjects, in order to excite their adoration, when, upon some solemn occasions, they think fit to appear in public.</p>
					<p>But let me ask thee, Belford, whether (on these solemn occasions) the preceding cavalcade; here a greater officer, and there a great minister, with their satellites, and glaring equipages; do not prepare the eyes of the wondering beholders, by degrees, to bear the blaze of canopy’d majesty (what though but an ugly old man perhaps himself? yet) glittering in the collected riches of his vast empire?</p>
					<p>And should not my beloved, for her own sake, descend, by <em>degrees</em>, from <em>goddess-hood</em> into <em>humanity</em>? If it be <em>pride</em> that restrains her, ought not that pride to be punished? If, as in the eastern emperors, it be <em>art</em> as well as <em>pride</em>, <em>art</em> is what she of all women need not use. If <em>shame</em>, what a shame to be ashamed to communicate to her adorer’s sight the most admirable of her personal graces?</p>
					<p>Let me perish, Belford, if I would not forego the brightest diadem in the world, for the pleasure of seeing a twin Lovelace at each charming breast, drawing from it his first sustenance; the pious task, for physical reasons,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a> continued for one month and no more!</p>
					<p class="footnote">* In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pamela</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span> these reasons are given, and are worthy of every parent’s consideration, as is the whole Letter, which contains the debate between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and his Pamela, on the important subject of mothers being nurses to their own children.</p>
					<p>I now, methinks, behold this most charming of women in this sweet office: her conscious eye now dropped on one, now on the other, with a sigh of maternal tenderness, and then raised up to my delighted eye, full of wishes, for the sake of the pretty varlets, and for her own sake, that I would deign to legitimate; that I would condescend to put on the nuptial fetters.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
