<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter XXX: Miss Cl. Harlowe, to Mrs. Judith Norton</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-30" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss <abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe, to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Judith Norton</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, <time datetime="08-24"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 24</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>The relation of such a conversation as passed between my aunt and you would have given me pleasure, had it come some time ago; because it would have met with a spirit more industrious than mine <em>now</em> is, to pick out remote comfort in the hope of a favourable turn that might one day have rewarded my patient duty.</p>
					<p>I did not doubt my aunt’s goodwill to me. Her affection I did not doubt. But shall we wonder that kings and princes meet with so little control in their passions, be they ever so violent, when, in a private family, an aunt, nay, even a mother in that family, shall choose to give up a once-favoured child against their own inclinations, rather than oppose an aspiring young man, who had armed himself with the authority of a father, who, when once determined, never would be expostulated with?</p>
					<p>And will you not <em>blame</em> me, if I say, that good sense, that kindred indulgence, must be a little offended at the treatment I have met with; and if I own, that I think that great rigour has been exercised towards me! And yet I am now authorized to call it <em>rigour</em> by the judgment of two excellent sisters, my mother and my aunt, who acknowledge (as you tell me from my aunt) that they have been obliged to join against me, contrary to their inclinations; and that even in a point which might seem to concern my eternal welfare.</p>
					<p>But I must not go on at this rate. For may not the inclination my mother has given up be the effect of a too-fond indulgence, rather than that I merit the indulgence? And yet so petulantly perverse am I, that I must tear myself from the subject.</p>
					<p>All then that I will say further to it, at this time, is, that were the intended goodness to be granted to me but a week hence, it would possibly be too late⁠—too late I mean to be of the consolation to me that I would wish from it: for what an inefficacious preparation must I have been making, if it has not, by this time, carried me above⁠—But above what?⁠—Poor mistaken creature! Unhappy self-deluder! that finds herself above nothing! Nor able to subdue her own faulty impatience!</p>
					<p>But in<em>deed</em>, to have done with a subject that I dare not trust myself with, if it come in your way, let my aunt Hervey, let my dear cousin Dolly, let the worthy <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams, know how exceedingly grateful to me their kind intentions and concern for me are: and, as the best warrant or justification of their good opinions, (since I know that their favour for me is founded on the belief that I loved virtue), tell them, that I <em>continued</em> to love virtue to my last hour, as I presume to hope it may be said; and assure them that I never made the least <em>wilful</em> deviation, however unhappy I became for one faulty step; which nevertheless was not owing to unworthy or perverse motives.</p>
					<p>I am very sorry that my cousin Morden has taken a resolution to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace.</p>
					<p>My apprehensions on this intelligence are a great abatement to the pleasure I have in knowing that he still loves me.</p>
					<p>My sister’s letter to me is a most affecting one⁠—so <em>needlessly</em>, so <em>ludicrously</em> taunting!⁠—But for that part of it that is so, I ought rather to pity her, than to be so much concerned at it as I am.</p>
					<p>I wonder what I have done to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brand⁠—I pray God to forgive both him and his informants, whoever they be. But if the scandal arise solely from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford’s visits, a very little time will confute it. Meanwhile, the packet I shall send you, which I sent to Miss Howe, will, I hope, satisfy <em>you</em>, my dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton, as to my reasons for admitting his visits.</p>
					<p>My sister’s taunting letter, and the inflexibleness of my dearer friends⁠—But how do remoter-begun subjects tend to the point which lies nearest the heart!⁠—As new-caught bodily disorders all crowd to a fractured or distempered part.</p>
					<p>I will break off, with requesting your prayers that I may be blessed with patience and due resignation; and with assuring you, that I am, and will be to the last hour of my life,</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your equally grateful and affectionate</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
