<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter XV: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-15" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sunday Afternoon</p>
					</header>
					<p>I am in great apprehension. Yet cannot help repeating my humble thanks to your mother and you for your last favour. I hope her kind end is answered by the contents of my last. Yet I must not think it enough to acknowledge her goodness to me, with a pencil only, on the cover of a letter sealed up. A few lines give me leave to write with regard to my anonymous letter to Lady Drayton. If I did <em>not</em> at that time tell you, as I believe I <em>did</em>, that my excellent <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton gave me her assistance in that letter, I now acknowledge that she did.</p>
					<p>Pray let your mother know this, for two reasons: one, that I may not be thought to arrogate to myself a discretion which does not belong to me; the other, that I may not suffer by the severe, but just inference she was pleased to draw; <em>doubling</em> my faults upon me, if I myself should act unworthy of the advice I was supposed to give.</p>
					<p>Before I come to what most nearly affects us all, I must chide you once more, for the severe, the <em>very</em> severe things you mention of our family, to the disparagement of their <strong>morals</strong>. Indeed, my dear, I wonder at you!⁠—A slighter occasion might have passed me, after I had written to you so often to so little purpose, on this topic. But, affecting as my own circumstances are, I cannot pass by, without animadversion, the reflection I need not repeat in words.</p>
					<p>There is not a worthier woman in England than my mother. Nor is my father that man you sometimes make him. Excepting in one point, I know not any family which lives more up to their duty, than the principals of ours. A little too <em>uncommunicative</em> for their great circumstances⁠—that is all.⁠—Why, then, have they not reason to insist upon unexceptionable morals in a man whose sought-for relationship to them, by a marriage in their family, they have certainly a right either to allow of, or to disallow.</p>
					<p>Another line or two, before I am engrossed by my own concerns⁠—upon your treatment of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman. Is it, do you think, generous to revenge upon an innocent person, the displeasure you receive from another quarter, where, I doubt, you are a trespasser too?⁠—But one thing I could tell him; and you have best not provoke me to it: It is this, That no woman uses ill the man she does not absolutely reject, but she has it in her heart to make him amends, when her tyranny has had its run, and he has completed the measure of his services and patience. My mind is not enough at ease to push this matter further.</p>
					<p>I will now give you the occasion of my present apprehensions.</p>
					<p>I had reason to fear, as I mentioned in mine of this morning, that a storm was brewing. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes came home from church this afternoon with my brother. Soon after, Betty brought me up a letter, without saying from whom. It was in a cover, and directed by a hand I never saw before; as if it were supposed that I would not receive and open it, had I known from whom it came.</p>
					<p>These are the contents:</p>
					<hr/>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-header">To <span epub:type="z3998:recipient">Miss Clarissa Harlowe</span></p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sunday, March 26.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dearest Madam,</p>
						</header>
						<p>I think myself a most unhappy man, in that I have never yet been able to pay my respects to you with youre consent, for one halfe-hour. I have something to communicat to you that concernes you much, if you be pleased to admit me to youre speech. Youre honour is concerned in it, and the honour of all youre familly. It relates to the designes of one whom you are sed to valew more than he desarves; and to some of his reprobat actions; which I am reddie to give you convincing proofes of the truth of. I may appear to be interested in it: but, neverthelesse, I am reddie to make oathe, that every tittle is true: and you will see what a man you are sed to favour. But I hope not so, for your owne honour.</p>
						<p>Pray, Madam, vouchsafe me a hearing, as you valew your honour and familly: which will oblidge, dearest Miss,</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your most humble and most faithful servant,</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Roger Solmes.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:postscript">I wait below <em>for</em> the hope of admittance.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<hr/>
					<p>I have no manner of doubt, that this is a poor device to get this man into my company. I would have sent down a verbal answer; but Betty refused to carry any message, which should prohibit his visiting me. So I was obliged either to see him, or to write to him. I wrote therefore an answer, of which I shall send you the rough draught. And now my heart aches for what may follow from it; for I hear a great hurry below.</p>
					<hr/>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-header">To <span epub:type="z3998:recipient">Roger Solmes, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></span></p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Sir,</p>
						</header>
						<p>Whatever you have to communicate to me, which concerns my honour, may as well be done by writing as by word of mouth. If <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace is any of <em>my</em> concern, I know not that <em>therefore</em> he ought to be <em>yours</em>: for the usage I receive on <em>your</em> account (I <em>must</em> think it so!) is so harsh, that were there not such a man in the world as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <em>Lovelace</em>, I would not wish to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <em>Solmes</em>, no, not for one half-hour, in the way he is pleased to be desirous to see me. I never can be in any danger from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, (and, of consequence, cannot be affected by any of your discoveries,) if the proposal I made be accepted. You have been acquainted with it no doubt. If not, be pleased to let my friends know, that if they will rid <em>me</em> of my apprehensions of one gentleman, I will rid them of <em>theirs</em> of another: And then, of what consequence to <em>them</em>, or to <em>me</em>, will it be, whether <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace be a good man, or a bad? And if not to <em>them</em>, nor to <em>me</em>, I see not how it can be of any to <em>you</em>. But if <em>you</em> do, I have nothing to say to that; and it will be a Christian part if you will expostulate with him upon the errors you have discovered, and endeavour to make him as good a man, as, no doubt, you are <em>yourself</em>, or you would not be so ready to detect and expose <em>him</em>.</p>
						<p>Excuse me, Sir: but, after my former letter to you, and your ungenerous perseverance; and after this attempt to avail yourself at the expense of another man’s character, rather than by your own proper merit; I see not that you can blame any asperity in her, whom you have so largely contributed to make unhappy.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<hr/>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sunday Night.</p>
					<p>My father was for coming up to me, in great wrath, it seems; but was persuaded to the contrary. My aunt Hervey was permitted to send me this that follow.⁠—Quick work, my dear!</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-header">To <span epub:type="z3998:recipient">Miss Clarissa Harlowe</span></p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Niece,</p>
						</header>
						<p>Everybody is now convinced, that nothing is to be done with you by way of gentleness or persuasion. Your mother will not permit you to stay in the house; for your father is so incensed by your strange letter to his friend, that she knows not what will be the consequence if you do. So, you are commanded to get ready to go to your uncle Antony’s out of hand.</p>
						<p>Your uncle thinks he has not deserved of you such an unwillingness as you show to go to his house.</p>
						<p>You don’t know the wickedness of the man for whose sake you think it worth while to quarrel with all your friends.</p>
						<p>You must not answer me. There will be no end of that.</p>
						<p>You know not the affliction you give to everybody; but to none more than to</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your affectionate aunt,</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Dorothy Hervey.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<hr/>
					<p>Forbid to write to my aunt, I took a bolder liberty. I wrote a few lines to my mother; beseeching her to procure me leave to throw myself at my father’s feet, and hers, if I <em>must</em> go, (nobody else present,) to beg pardon for the trouble I had given them both, and their blessings; and to receive their commands as to my removal, and the time for it, from their own lips.</p>
					<p>“What new boldness this!⁠—Take it back; and bid her learn to obey,” was my mother’s angry answer, with my letter returned, unopened.</p>
					<p>But that I might omit nothing, that had an appearance of duty, I wrote a few lines to my father himself, to the same purpose; begging, that he would not turn me out of his house, without his blessing. But this, torn in two pieces, and unopened, was brought me up again by Betty, with an air, one hand held up, the other extended, the torn letter in her open palm; and a See here!⁠—What a sad thing is this!⁠—Nothing will do but duty, Miss!⁠—Your papa said, Let her tell me of <em>deeds</em>!⁠—I’ll receive no <em>words</em> from her. And so he tore the letter, and flung the pieces at my head.</p>
					<p>So desperate was my case, I was resolved not to stop even at this repulse. I took my pen, and addressed myself to my uncle Harlowe, enclosing that which my mother had returned unopened, and the torn unopened one sent to my father; having first hurried off a transcript for you.</p>
					<p>My uncle was going home, and it was delivered to him just as he stepped into his chariot. What may be the fate of it therefore I cannot know till tomorrow.</p>
					<p>The following is a copy of it:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p class="letter-header">To <span epub:type="z3998:recipient">John Harlowe, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></span></p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">My Dear and Ever-honoured Uncle,</p>
						</header>
						<p>I have nobody now but you, to whom I can apply, with hope, so much as to have my humble addresses opened and read. My aunt Hervey has given me commands which I want to have explained; but she has forbid me writing to <em>her</em>. Hereupon I took the liberty to write to my father and mother. You will see, Sir, by the torn one, and by the other, (both unopened,) what has been the result. This, Sir, perhaps you already know: but, as you know not the contents of the disgraced letters, I beseech you to read them both, that you may be a witness for me, that they are not filled with either complaints or expostulations, nor contain anything undutiful. Give me leave to say, Sir, that if deaf-eared anger will neither grant <em>me</em> a hearing, nor, <em>what I write</em> a perusal, some time hence the hardheartedness may be regretted. I beseech you, dear, good Sir, to let me know what is meant by sending me to my uncle Antony’s house, rather than to yours, or to my aunt Hervey’s, or elsewhere? If it be for what I apprehend it to be, life will not be supportable upon the terms. I beg also to know, <strong>when</strong> I am to be turned out of doors!⁠—My heart strongly gives me, <em>that if once I am compelled to leave this house, I never shall see it more</em>.</p>
						<p>It becomes me, however, to declare, that I write not this through perverseness, or in resentment. God knows my heart, I do not! But the treatment I apprehend I shall meet with, if carried to my other uncle’s, will, in all probability, give the finishing stroke to the distresses, the undeserved distresses I will be bold to call them, of</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your once highly-favoured, but now unhappy,</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
