<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 5: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline"><abbr>St.</abbr> Alban’s, Monday Night</p>
					</header>
					<p>I snatch a few moments while my beloved is retired, (as I hope, to rest,) to perform my promise. No pursuit⁠—nor have I apprehensions of any; though I must make my charmer dread that there will be one.</p>
					<p>And now, let me tell thee, that never was joy so complete as mine!⁠—But let me inquire, is not the angel flown away?</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>O no! She is in the next apartment!⁠—Securely mine!⁠—Mine forever!</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>O ecstasy!⁠—My heart will burst my breast,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To leap into her bosom!</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>I knew that the whole stupid family were in a combination to do my business for me. I told thee that they were all working for me, like so many ground moles; and still more blind than the moles are said to be, unknowing that they did so. I myself, the director of their principal motions; which falling in with the malice of their little hearts, they took to be all their own.</p>
					<p>But did I say my joy was perfect?⁠—O no!⁠—It receives some abatement from my disgusted bride. For how can I endure to think that I owe more to her relations’ precautions than to her favour for me?⁠—Or even, as far as I know, to her preference of me to another man?</p>
					<p>But let me not indulge this thought. Were I to do so, it might cost my charmer dear. Let me rejoice, that she has passed the rubicon: that she cannot return: that, as I have ordered it, the flight will appear to the implacables to be altogether with her own consent: and that if I doubt her love, I can put her to trials as mortifying to her niceness, as glorious to my pride.⁠—For, let me tell thee, dearly as I love her, if I thought there was but the shadow of a doubt in her mind whether she preferred me to any man living, I would show her no mercy.</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday, Day Dawn</p>
					<p>But, on the wings of love, I fly to my charmer, who perhaps by this time is rising to encourage the tardy dawn. I have not slept a wink of the hour and half I lay down to invite sleep. It seems to me, that I am not so much body, as to require such a vulgar renovation.</p>
					<p>But why, as in the chariot, as in the inn, at alighting, all heart-bursting grief, my dearest creature? So persecuted as thou wert persecuted!⁠—So much in danger of the most abhorred compulsion!⁠—Yet grief so <em>unsuspectedly</em> sincere for an escape so critical!⁠—Take care, take care, O beloved of my soul! for jealous is the heart in which love has erected a temple to thee.</p>
					<p>Yet, it must be allowed, that such a sudden transition must affect her; must ice her over. When a little more used to her new situation; when her hurries are at an end; when she sees how religiously I shall observe all her <strong>injunctions</strong>; she will undoubtedly have the gratitude to distinguish between the confinement she has escaped from, and the liberty she has reason to rejoice in.</p>
					<p>She comes! She comes! And the sun is just rising to attend her! Adieu! Be half as happy as I am (for all diffidencies, like night-fogs before the sun, disperse at her approach) and, next myself, thou wilt be the happiest man in the world.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
