<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 2: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</span>
				</h3>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday, <time datetime="1738-08-11"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 11</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>I will send you a large packet, as you desire and expect; since I can do it by so safe a conveyance: but not all that is come to my hand⁠—for I must own that my friends are very severe; too severe for anybody, who loves them not, to see their letters. You, my dear, would not call them my friends, you said, long ago; but my relations: indeed I cannot call them my relations, I think!⁠—But I am ill; and therefore perhaps more peevish than I should be. It is difficult to go out of ourselves to give a judgment against ourselves; and yet, oftentimes, to pass a just judgment, we ought.</p>
				<p>I thought I should alarm you in the choice of my executor. But the sad necessity I am reduced to must excuse me.</p>
				<p>I shall not repeat anything I have said before on that subject: but if your objections will not be answered to your satisfaction by the papers and letters I shall enclose, marked 1, 2, 3, 4, to 9, I must think myself in another instance unhappy; since I am engaged too far (and with my own judgment too) to recede.</p>
				<p>As <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford has transcribed for me, in confidence, from his friend’s letters, the passages which accompany this, I must insist that you suffer no soul but yourself to peruse them; and that you return them by the very first opportunity; that so no use may be made of them that may do hurt either to the original writer or to the communicator. You’ll observe I am bound by promise to this care. If through my means any mischief should arise, between this humane and that inhuman libertine, I should think myself utterly inexcusable.</p>
				<p>I subjoin a list of the papers or letters I shall enclose. You must return them all when perused.*</p>
				<p class="footnote">* 1. A letter from Miss Montague, dated. … <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 1. 2. A copy of my answer.. …  …  … <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 3. 3. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford’s Letter to me, which will show you what my request was to him, and his compliance with it; and the desired ex- tracts from his friend’s letters. … <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 3, 4. 4. A copy of my answer, with thanks; and re- questing him to undertake the executor- ship …  …  …  …  …  … <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 4. 5. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford’s acceptance of the trust . . <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 4. 6. Miss Montague’s letter, with a generous offer from Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> and the Ladies of that family.. …  …  …  …  … <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 7. 7. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s to me.. …  …  … <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 7. 8. Copy of mine to Miss Montague, in answer to hers of the day before. …  … <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 8. 9. Copy of my answer to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. … <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 11.</p>
				<p>You will see by these several Letters, written and received in so little a space of time (to say nothing of what I have received and written which I cannot show you,) how little opportunity or leisure I can have for writing my own story.</p>
				<p>I am very much tired and fatigued⁠—with⁠—I don’t know what⁠—with writing, I think⁠—but most with myself, and with a situation I cannot help aspiring to get out of, and above!</p>
				<p>O my dear, the world we live in is a sad, a very sad world!⁠—While under our parents’ protecting wings, we know nothing at all of it. Book-learned and a scribbler, and looking at people as I saw them as visiters or visiting, I thought I knew a great deal of it. Pitiable ignorance!⁠—Alas! I knew nothing at all!</p>
				<p>With zealous wishes for your happiness, and the happiness of everyone dear to you, I am, and will ever be,</p>
				<p>Your gratefully-affectionate <abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
