<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 83: Miss Cl. Harlowe, to Robert Lovelace, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-83" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss <abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe, to Robert Lovelace, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday, <time datetime="1738-08-11"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 11</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>It is a cruel alternative to be either forced to see you, or to write to you. But a will of my own has been long denied me; and to avoid a greater evil, nay, now I may say, the greatest, I write.</p>
					<p>Were I capable of disguising or concealing my real sentiments, I might safely, I dare say, give you the remote hope you request, and yet keep all my resolutions. But I must tell you, Sir, (it becomes my character to tell you,) that, were I to live more years than perhaps I may weeks, and there were not another man in the world, I could not, I would not, be yours.</p>
					<p>There is no merit in performing a <em>duty</em>.</p>
					<p>Religion enjoins me not only to forgive injuries, but to return good for evil. It is all my consolation, and I bless God for giving me that, that I am now in such a state of mind, with regard to you, that I can cheerfully obey its dictates. And accordingly I tell you, that, wherever you go, I wish you happy. And in this I mean to include every good wish.</p>
					<p>And now having, with great reluctance I own, complied with one of your compulsatory alternatives, I expect the fruits of it.</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
