<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 50: Mr. Belford, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-50" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">L</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Miss Howe</span>
				</h3>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday Night, <time datetime="1738-10-05"><abbr>Oct.</abbr> 5</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>I return you, Madam, my most respectful thanks for your condescending hint, in relation to the pious wishes of your exalted friend for my thorough reformation.</p>
				<p>I will only say, that it will be my earnest and unwearied endeavour to make those generous wishes effectual: and I hope for the Divine blessing upon such my endeavours, or else I know they will be in vain.</p>
				<p>I cannot, Madam, express how much I think myself obliged to you for your farther condescension, in writing to me so frankly the state of your past and present mind, in relation to the single and matrimonial life. If the lady by whom, as the executor of her inimitable friend, I am thus honoured, has failings, never were failings so lovely in woman!⁠—How much more lovely, indeed, than the virtues of many of her sex!</p>
				<p>I might have ventured into the hands of such a lady the Colonel’s original letter entire. The worthy gentleman exceedingly admires you; and this caution was the effect of his politeness only, and of his regard for you.</p>
				<p>I send you, Madam, a letter from Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> to myself; and the copies of three others written in consequence of that. These will acquaint you with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s departure from England, and with other particulars, which you will be curious to know.</p>
				<p>Be pleased to keep to yourself such of the contents as your own prudence will suggest to you ought not to be seen by any body else.</p>
				<p>I am, Madam, with the profoundest and most grateful respect,</p>
				<p>Your faithful and obliged humble servant, John Belford.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
