<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter IV: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>Curse upon the Colonel, and curse upon the writer of the last letter I received, and upon all the world! Thou to pretend to be as much interested in my Clarissa’s fate as myself!⁠—’Tis well for one of us that this was not said to me, instead of written.⁠—Living or dying, she is mine⁠—and only mine. Have I not earned her dearly?⁠—Is not d⁠⸺⁠n⁠—⁠n likely to be the purchase to me, though a happy eternity will be hers?</p>
					<p>An eternal separation!⁠—O God! O God!⁠—How can I bear that thought!⁠—But yet there is life!⁠—Yet, therefore, hope⁠—enlarge my hope, and thou shalt be my good genius, and I will forgive thee everything.</p>
					<p>For this last time⁠—but it must not, shall not be the <em>last</em>⁠—Let me hear, the moment thou receivest this⁠—what I <em>am</em> to be⁠—for, at present, I am</p>
					<p>The most miserable of Men.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Rose, at Knightsbridge, Five o’clock.</p>
					<p>My fellow tells me that thou art sending Mowbray and Tourville to me:⁠—I want them not⁠—my soul’s sick of them, and of all the world⁠—but most of myself. Yet, as they send me word they will come to me immediately, I will wait for them, and for thy next. O Belford, let it not be⁠—But hasten it, be what it may!</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
