<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 31: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-5-31" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></span>
				</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Saturday, Six o’clock, <time datetime="1738-06-10">June 10</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>The lady gave Will.’s sweetheart a letter last night to be carried to the post-house, as this morning, directed for Miss Howe, under cover to Hickman. I dare say neither cover nor letter will be seen to have been opened. The contents but eight lines⁠—To own⁠—“The receipt of her double-dated letter in safety; and referring to a longer letter, which she intends to write, when she shall have a quieter heart, and less trembling fingers. But mentions something to have happened (My detecting her she means) which has given her very great flutters, confusions, and apprehensions: but which she will wait the issue of (Some hopes for me hence, Jack!) before she gives her fresh perturbation or concern on her account.⁠—She tells her how impatient she shall be for her next,” <abbr>etc.</abbr></p>
					<p>Now, Belford, I thought it would be but kind in me to save Miss Howe’s concern on these alarming hints; since the curiosity of such a spirit must have been prodigiously excited by them. Having therefore so good a copy to imitate, I wrote; and, taking out that of my beloved, put under the same cover the following short billet; inscriptive and conclusive parts of it in her own words.</p>
					<p>Hampstead, Tues. Even. My Ever-Dear Miss Howe,</p>
					<p>A few lines only, till calmer spirits and quieter fingers be granted me, and till I can get over the shock which your intelligence has given me⁠—to acquaint you⁠—that your kind long letter of Wednesday, and, as I may say, of Thursday morning, is come safe to my hands. On receipt of yours by my messenger to you, I sent for it from Wilson’s. There, thank Heaven! it lay. May that Heaven reward you for all your past, and for all your intended goodness to</p>
					<p>Your forever obliged, <abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>I took great pains in writing this. It cannot, I hope, be suspected. Her hand is so very delicate. Yet hers is written less beautifully than she usually writes: and I hope Miss Howe will allow somewhat for hurry of spirits, and unsteady fingers.</p>
					<p>My consideration for Miss Howe’s ease of mind extended still farther than to the instance I have mentioned.</p>
					<p>That this billet might be with her as soon as possible, (and before it could have reached Hickman by the post,) I dispatched it away by a servant of Mowbray’s. Miss Howe, had there been any failure or delay, might, as thou wilt think, have communicated her anxieties to her fugitive friend; and she to me perhaps in a way I should not have been pleased with.</p>
					<p>Once more wilt thou wonderingly question⁠—All this pains for a single girl?</p>
					<p>Yes, Jack⁠—But is not this girl a <strong>Clarissa</strong>?⁠—And who knows, but kind fortune, as a reward for my perseverance, may toss me in her charming friend? Less likely things have come to pass, Belford. And to be sure I shall have her, if I resolve upon it.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
