<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 4: Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday <abbr>Morn.</abbr> 10 o’clock (<time datetime="03-23"><abbr>Mar.</abbr> 23</time>)</p>
					</header>
					<p>I will postpone, or perhaps pass by, several observations which I had to make on other parts of your letters; to acquaint you, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman, when in London, found an opportunity to inquire after <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s town life and conversation.</p>
					<p>At the Cocoa-tree, in Pall-mall, he fell in with two of his intimates, the one named Belton, the other Mowbray; both very free of speech, and probably as free in their lives: but the waiters paid them great respect, and on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman’s inquiry after their characters, called them men of fortune and honour.</p>
					<p>They began to talk of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace of their own accord; and upon some gentlemen in the room asking, when they expected him in town, answered, that very day. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman (as they both went on praising Lovelace) said, he had indeed heard, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace was a very fine gentleman⁠—and was proceeding, when one of them, interrupting him, said⁠—Only, Sir, the finest gentleman in the world; that’s all.</p>
					<p>And so he led them on to expatiate more particularly on his qualities; which they were very fond of doing: but said not one single word in behalf of his morals⁠—<em>Mind that</em> also, in your uncle’s style.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman said, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace was very happy, as he understood, in the esteem of the ladies; and smiling, to make them believe he did not think amiss of it, that he pushed his good fortune as far as it would go.</p>
					<p>Well put, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman! thought I; equally grave and sage⁠—thou seemest not to be a stranger to their dialect, as I suppose this is. But I said nothing; for I have often tried to find out this <em>mighty</em> sober man of my mother’s: but hitherto have only to say, that he is either very moral, or very cunning.</p>
					<p>No doubt of it, replied one of them; and out came an oath, with a Who would not?⁠—That he did as every young fellow would do.</p>
					<p>Very true! said my mother’s puritan⁠—but I hear he is in treaty with a fine lady⁠—</p>
					<p>So he was, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belton said⁠—The devil fetch her! (vile brute!) for she engrossed all his time⁠—but that the lady’s family ought to be⁠—something⁠—(<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman desired to be excused repeating what⁠—though he had repeated what was worse) and might dearly repent their usage of a man of his family and merit.</p>
					<p>Perhaps they may think him too wild, cries Hickman: and theirs is, I hear, a very sober family⁠—</p>
					<p><strong>Sober!</strong> said one of them: A good honest word, Dick!⁠—Where the devil has it lain all this time?⁠—D⸺me if I have heard of it in this sense ever since I was at college! and then, said he, we bandied it about among twenty of us as an obsolete.</p>
					<p>These, my dear, are <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s companions: you’ll be pleased to take <em>notice of that</em>!</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman said, this put him out of countenance.</p>
					<p>I stared at him, and with such a meaning in my eyes, as he knew how to take; and so was out of countenance again.</p>
					<p>Don’t you remember, my dear, who it was that told a young gentleman designed for the gown, who owned that he was apt to be too easily put out of countenance when he came into free company, “That it was a bad sign; that it looked as if his morals were not proof; but that his good disposition seemed rather the effect of accident and education, than of such a choice as was founded upon principle?” And don’t you know the lesson the very same young lady gave him, “To endeavour to stem and discountenance vice, and to glory in being an advocate in all companies for virtue;” particularly observing, “That it was natural for a man to shun or to give up what he was ashamed of?” Which she should be sorry to think <em>his</em> case on this occasion: adding, “That vice was a coward, and would hide its head, when opposed by such a virtue as had presence of mind, and a full persuasion of its own rectitude to support it.” The lady, you may remember, modestly put her doctrine into the mouth of a worthy preacher, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lewen, as she used to do, when she has a mind not to be thought what she is at so early an age; and that it may give more weight to anything <q>she hit upon, that might appear tolerable</q>, was her modest manner of speech.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman, upon the whole, professed to me, upon his <q>second recovery</q>, that he had no reason to think well of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s morals, from what he heard of him in town; yet his two intimates talked of his being <em>more regular</em> than he <em>used to be</em>. That he had made a very good resolution, <em>that</em> of old Tom Wharton, was the expression, That he would never <em>give</em> a challenge, nor <em>refuse</em> one; which they praised in him highly: that, in short, he was a very brave fellow, and the most agreeable companion in the world: and would one day make a great figure in his country; since there was nothing he was not capable of⁠—</p>
					<p>I am afraid that his last assertion is too true. And this, my dear, is all that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman could pick up about him: And is it not enough to determine such a mind as yours, if not <em>already</em> determined?</p>
					<p>Yet it must be said too, that if there be a woman in the world that can reclaim him, it is you. And, by your account of his behaviour in the interview between you, I own I have some hope of him. At least, this I will say, that all the arguments he then used with you, seemed to be just and right. And if you <em>are</em> to be his⁠—But no more of that: he cannot, after all, deserve you.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
