<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter L: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-50" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Wednesday Night, <time datetime="1738-06-28">June 28</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>O My Dearest Miss Howe!</p>
					<p>Once more have I escaped⁠—But, alas! I, my <em>best self</em>, have <em>not</em> escaped!⁠—Oh! your poor Clarissa Harlowe! <em>you</em> also will hate me, I fear!⁠—</p>
					<p>Yet you won’t, when you know all!</p>
					<p>But no more of my self! my <em>lost</em> self. You that can rise in a morning to be blest, and to bless; and go to rest delighted with your own reflections, and in your unbroken, unstarting slumbers, conversing with saints and angels, the former only more pure than yourself, as they have shaken off the incumbrance of body; you shall be my subject, as you have long, long, been my only pleasure. And let me, at awful distance, revere my beloved Anna Howe, and in her reflect upon what her Clarissa Harlowe once was!</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>Forgive, O forgive my rambling. My peace is destroyed. My intellects are touched. And what flighty nonsense must you read, if you now will vouchsafe to correspond with me, as formerly!</p>
					<p>O my best, my dearest, my <em>only</em> friend! what a tale have I to unfold!⁠—But still upon <em>self</em>, this vile, this hated <em>self</em>!⁠—I will shake it off, if possible; and why should I not, since I think, except one wretch, I hate nothing so much? Self, then, be banished from <em>self</em> one moment (for I doubt it <em>will</em> be for no longer) to inquire after a <em>dearer</em> object, my beloved Anna Howe!⁠—whose mind, all robed in spotless white, charms and irradiates⁠—But what would I say?⁠—</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>And how, my dearest friend, after this rhapsody, which on re-perusal, I would not let go, but to show you what a distracted mind dictates to my trembling pen! <em>How do you?</em> You have been very ill, it seems. That you are <em>recovered</em>, my dear, let me hear. That your mother is well, pray let me hear, and hear quickly. This comfort surely is owing to me; for if life is no <em>worse</em> than chequer-work, I must now have a little white to come, having seen nothing but black, all unchequered dismal black, for a great, great while.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>And what is all this wild incoherence for? It is only to beg to know how you have been, and how you do now, by a line directed for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rachel Clark, at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith’s, a glove-shop, in King-street, Covent-garden; which (although my abode is secret to everybody else) will reach the hands of⁠—<em>your unhappy</em>⁠—but that’s not enough⁠—</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your miserable</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
