<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter L: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-50" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, <time datetime="07-27">July 27</time></p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">My Dearest Miss Howe,</p>
					</header>
					<p>After I have thankfully acknowledged your favour in sending <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman to visit me before you set out upon your intended journey, I must chide you (in the sincerity of that faithful love, which could not be the love it is if it would not admit of that <em>cementing</em> freedom) for suspending the decisive negative, which, upon such full deliberation, I had entreated you to give to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s relations.</p>
					<p>I am sorry that I am obliged to <em>repeat</em> to you, my dear, who know me so well, that, were I sure I should live <em>many years</em>, I would not have <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace; much less can I think of him, as it is probable I may not live <em>one</em>.</p>
					<p>As to the <em>world</em> and its <em>censures</em>, you know, my dear, that, however desirous I always was of a fair fame, yet I never thought it right to give more than a <em>second place</em> to the world’s opinion. The challenges made to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, by Miss D’Oily, in public company, are a fresh proof that I have lost my reputation: and what advantage would it be to me, were it retrievable, and were I to live long, if I could not acquit myself to <em>myself</em>?</p>
					<p>Having in my former said so much on the freedoms you have taken with my friends, I shall say the less now; but <em>your hint</em>, that something else has newly passed between some of them and you, gives me great concern, and that as well for my <em>own sake</em> as for <em>theirs</em>, since it must necessarily incense them against me. I wish, my dear, that I had been left to my own course on an occasion so very interesting to myself. But, since what is done cannot be helped, I must abide the consequences: yet I dread <em>more than before</em>, what may be my sister’s answer, if an answer will be at all vouchsafed.</p>
					<p>Will you give me leave, my dear, to close this subject with one remark?⁠—It is this: that my beloved friend, in points where her own laudable <em>zeal</em> is concerned, has ever seemed more ready to fly from the <em>rebuke</em>, than from the <em>fault</em>. If you will excuse this freedom, I will acknowledge thus far in favour of your way of thinking, as to the conduct of some parents in these nice cases, that <em>indiscreet</em> opposition does frequently as much mischief as <em>giddy</em> love.</p>
					<p>As to the invitation you are so kind as to give me, to remove privately into your neighbourhood, I have told <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman that I will consider of it; but believe, if you will be so good as to excuse me, that I shall not accept of it, even should I be able to remove. I will give you my reasons for declining it; and so I ought, when both my love and my gratitude would make a visit now-and-then from my dear Miss Howe the most consolate thing in the world to me.</p>
					<p>You must know then, that this great town, wicked as it is, wants not opportunities of being better; having daily prayers at several churches in it; and I am desirous, as my strength will permit, to embrace those opportunities. The method I have proposed to myself (and was beginning to practise when that cruel arrest deprived me of both freedom and strength) is this: when I was disposed to gentle exercise, I took a chair to <abbr>St.</abbr> Dunstan’s church in Fleet-street, where are prayers at seven in the morning; I proposed <em>if the weather favoured</em>, to walk (<em>if not</em>, to take chair) to Lincoln’s-inn chapel, where, at eleven in the morning, and at five in the afternoon, are the same desirable opportunities; and at other times to go no farther than Covent-garden church, where are early morning prayers likewise.</p>
					<p>This method pursued, I doubt not, will greatly help, as it has already done, to calm my disturbed thoughts, and to bring me to that perfect resignation after which I aspire: for I must own, my dear, that sometimes still my griefs and my reflections are too heavy for me; and all the aid I can draw from <em>religious duties</em> is hardly sufficient to support my staggering reason. I am a very young creature you know, my dear, to be left to my own conduct in such circumstances as I am in.</p>
					<p>Another reason why I choose not to go down into your neighbourhood, is the displeasure that might arise, on my account, between your mother and you.</p>
					<p>If indeed you were actually married, and the worthy man (who would then have a title to all your regard) were earnestly desirous of near neighbourhood, I know not what I might do: for although I might not perhaps intend to give up my other important reasons at the time I should make you a congratulatory visit, yet I might not know how to deny myself the pleasure of continuing near you when there.</p>
					<p>I send you enclosed the copy of my letter to my sister. I hope it will be thought to be written with a true penitent spirit; for indeed it is. I desire that you will not think I stoop too low in it; since there can be no such thing as <em>that</em> in a child to parents whom she has unhappily offended.</p>
					<p>But if still (perhaps more disgusted than before at your freedom with them) they should pass it by with the contempt of silence, (for I have not yet been favoured with an answer,) I must learn to think it right in them to do so; especially as it is my first direct application: for I have often censured the boldness of those, who, applying for a favour, which it is in a person’s option to grant or refuse, take the liberty of being offended, if they are not gratified; as if the <em>petitioned</em> had not as good a right <em>to reject</em>, as the <em>petitioner to ask</em>.</p>
					<p>But if my letter should be answered, and that in such terms as will make me loth to communicate it to so warm a friend⁠—you must not, my dear, take it upon yourself to censure my relations; but allow for them as they know not what I have suffered; as being filled with <em>just</em> resentments against me, (<em>just</em> to them if they think them just;) and as not being able to judge of the reality of my penitence.</p>
					<p>And after all, what can they do for me?⁠—They can only pity me: and what will that but augment their own <em>grief</em>; to which at present their <em>resentment</em> is an alleviation? for can they by their pity restore to me my lost reputation? Can they by it purchase a sponge that will wipe out from the year the past fatal four months of my life?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-307" id="noteref-307" epub:type="noteref">307</a></p>
					<p>Your account of the gay, unconcerned behaviour of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, at the Colonel’s, does not surprise me at all, after I am told that he had the intrepidity to go there, knowing who were <em>invited</em> and <em>expected</em>.⁠—Only this, my dear, I really wonder at, that Miss Howe could imagine that I could have a thought of such a man for a husband.</p>
					<p>Poor wretch! I pity him, to see him fluttering about; abusing talents that were given him for excellent purposes; taking in consideration for courage; and dancing, fearless of danger, on the edge of a precipice!</p>
					<p>But indeed his threatening to see me most sensibly alarms and shocks me. I cannot but hope that I never, never more shall see him in this world.</p>
					<p>Since you are so loth, my dear, to send the desired negative to the ladies of his family, I will only trouble you to transmit the letter I shall enclose for that purpose; directed indeed to yourself, because it was to you that those ladies applied themselves on this occasion; but to be sent by you to any one of the ladies, at your own choice.</p>
					<p>I commend myself, my dearest Miss Howe, to your prayers; and conclude with repeated thanks for sending <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman to me; and with wishes for your health and happiness, and for the speedy celebration of your nuptials;</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your ever affectionate and obliged,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
