<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 42: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-42" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sunday, <time datetime="07-23">July 23</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>The letter accompanying this being upon a very particular subject, I would not embarrass it, as I may say, with any other. And yet having some farther matters upon my mind, which will want your excuse for directing them to you, I hope the following lines will <em>have</em> that excuse.</p>
					<p>My good <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton, so long ago as in a letter dated the <time datetime="07-03">3d of this month</time>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-302" id="noteref-302" epub:type="noteref">302</a> hinted to me that my relations took amiss some severe things you were pleased, in love to me, to say to them. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton mentioned it with that respectful love which she bears to my dearest friend: but wished, for <em>my</em> sake, that you would rein in a vivacity, which, on most other occasions, so charmingly becomes you. This was her sense. You know that <em>I</em> am warranted to speak and write freer to my Anna Howe than <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton would do.</p>
					<p>I durst not mention it to you at that time, because appearances were so strong against me, on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s getting me again into his power, (after my escape to Hampstead,) as made you very angry with me when you answered mine on my second escape. And, soon afterwards, I was put under that barbarous arrest; so that I could not well touch upon the subject till now.</p>
					<p>Now, therefore, my dearest Miss Howe, let me <em>repeat</em> my earnest request (for this is not the first time by several that I have been obliged to chide you on this occasion,) that you will spare my parents, and other relations, in all your conversations about me. Indeed, I wish they had thought fit to take other measures with me: But who shall judge for them?⁠—The event has justified them, and condemned me.⁠—They expected nothing good of this vile man; <em>he</em> has not, therefore, deceived <em>them</em>: but they expected other things from <em>me</em>; and <em>I</em> have. And they have the more reason to be set against me, if (as my aunt Hervey wrote<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-303" id="noteref-303" epub:type="noteref">303</a> formerly,) they intended not to force my inclinations in favour of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes; and if they believe that my going off was the effect of choice and premeditation.</p>
					<p>I have no desire to be received to favour by them: For why should I sit down to wish for what I have no reason to expect?⁠—Besides, I could not look them in the face, if they <em>would</em> receive me. Indeed I could not. All I have to hope for is, first, that my father will absolve me from his heavy malediction: and next, for a last blessing. The obtaining of these favours are needful to my peace of mind.</p>
					<p>I have written to my sister; but have only mentioned the absolution.</p>
					<p>I am afraid I shall receive a very harsh answer from her: my fault, in the eyes of my family, is of so enormous a nature, that my <em>first</em> application will hardly be encouraged. Then they know not (nor perhaps will believe) that I am so very ill as I am. So that, were I actually to die before they could have time to take the necessary informations, you must not blame them too severely. You must call it a fatality. I know not what you must call it: for, alas! I have made them as miserable as I am myself. And yet sometimes I think that, were they cheerfully to pronounce me forgiven, I know not whether my concern for having offended them would not be augmented: since I imagine that nothing can be more wounding to a spirit not ungenerous than a <em>generous forgiveness</em>.</p>
					<p>I hope your mother will permit our correspondence for <em>one</em> month more, although I do not take her advice as to having this man. Only for <em>one</em> month. I will not desire it longer. When catastrophes are winding up, what changes (changes that make one’s heart shudder to think of,) may <em>one</em> short month produce?⁠—But if she will not⁠—why then, my dear, it becomes us both to acquiesce.</p>
					<p>You can’t think what my apprehensions would have been, had I known <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman was to have had a meeting (on such a questioning occasion as must have been his errand from you) with that haughty and uncontroulable man.</p>
					<p>You give me hope of a visit from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman: let him <em>expect</em> to see me greatly altered. I know he loves me: for he loves everyone whom you love. A painful interview, I doubt! But I shall be glad to see a man whom <em>you</em> will one day, and that on an <em>early</em> day, I hope, make happy; whose gentle manners, and unbounded love for you, will make <em>you</em> so, if it be not your own fault.</p>
					<p>I am, my dearest, kindest friend, the sweet companion of my happy hours, the friend ever dearest and nearest to my fond heart,</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your equally obliged and faithful,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
