<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 13: Miss Charlotte Montague, to Miss Howe <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> Hall,</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-13" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Charlotte Montague, to Miss Howe <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> Hall,</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday Afternoon</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Miss Howe,</p>
					</header>
					<p>Your letter has infinitely disturbed us all.</p>
					<p>This wretched man has been half distracted ever since Saturday night.</p>
					<p>We knew not what ailed him, till your letter was brought.</p>
					<p>Vile wretch, as he is, he is however innocent of this new evil.</p>
					<p>Indeed he is, he <em>must</em> be; as I shall more at large acquaint you.</p>
					<p>But will not now detain your messenger.</p>
					<p>Only to satisfy your just impatience, by telling you, that the dear young lady is safe, and we hope well.</p>
					<p>A horrid mistake of his general orders has subjected her to the terror and disgrace of an arrest.</p>
					<p>Poor dear Miss Harlowe!⁠—Her sufferings have endeared her to us, almost as much as her excellencies can have endeared her to you.</p>
					<p>But she must now be quite at liberty.</p>
					<p>He has been a distracted man, ever since the news was brought him; and we knew not what ailed him.</p>
					<p>But that I said before.</p>
					<p>My Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> my lady Sarah Sadleir, and my Lady Betty Lawrance, will all write to you this very afternoon.</p>
					<p>And so will the wretch himself.</p>
					<p>And send it by a servant of their own, not to detain yours.</p>
					<p>I know not what I write.</p>
					<p>But you shall have all the particulars, just, and true, and fair, from</p>
					<p>Dear Madam,</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your most faithful and obedient servant,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">Ch.</abbr> Montague.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
