<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 33: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-33" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday Morning, Six o’clock</p>
					</header>
					<p>The day is come!⁠—I wish it were happily over. I have had a wretched night. Hardly a wink have I slept, ruminating upon the approaching interview. The very distance of time to which they consented, has added solemnity to the meeting, which otherwise it would not have had.</p>
					<p>A thoughtful mind is not a blessing to be coveted, unless it had such a happy vivacity with it as yours: a vivacity, which enables a person to enjoy the <em>present</em>, without being overanxious about the <em>future</em>.</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday, Eleven o’clock.</p>
					<p>I have had a visit from my aunt Hervey. Betty, in her alarming way, told me, I should have a lady to breakfast with me, whom I little expected; giving me to believe it was my mother. This fluttered me so much, on hearing a lady coming upstairs, supposing it was she, (and not knowing how to account for her motives in such a visit, after I had been so long banished from her presence,) that my aunt, at her entrance, took notice of my disorder; and, after her first salutation,</p>
					<p>Why, Miss, said she, you seem surprised.⁠—Upon my word, you thoughtful young ladies have strange apprehensions about nothing at all. What, taking my hand, can be the matter with you?⁠—Why, my dear, tremble, tremble, tremble, at this rate? You’ll not be fit to be seen by anybody. Come, my love, kissing my cheek, pluck up a courage. By this needless flutter on the approaching interview, when it is over you will judge of your other antipathies, and laugh at yourself for giving way to so apprehensive an imagination.</p>
					<p>I said, that whatever we strongly imagined, was in its effect at the time <em>more</em> than imaginary, although to others it might not appear so: that I had not rested one hour all night: that the impertinent set over me, by giving me room to think my mother was coming up, had so much disconcerted me, that I should be very little qualified to see anybody I disliked to see.</p>
					<p>There was no accounting for these things, she said. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes last night supposed he should be under as much agitation as I could be.</p>
					<p>Who is it, then, Madam, that so reluctant an interview on <em>both</em> sides, is to please?</p>
					<p>Both of you, my dear, I hope, after the first flurries are over. The most apprehensive beginnings, I have often known, make the happiest conclusions.</p>
					<p>There can be but one happy conclusion to the intended visit; and that is, That both sides may be satisfied it will be the last.</p>
					<p>She then represented how unhappy it would be for me, if I did not suffer myself to be prevailed upon: she pressed me to receive <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes as became my education: and declared, that his apprehensions on the expectation he had of seeing me, were owing to his love and his awe; intimating, That true love is ever accompanied by fear and reverence; and that no blustering, braving lover could deserve encouragement.</p>
					<p>To this I answered, That constitution was to be considered: that a man of spirit would act like one, and could do nothing meanly: that a creeping mind would creep into everything, where it had a view to obtain a benefit by it; and insult, where it had power, and nothing to expect: that this was not a point now to be determined with me: that I had said as much as I could possibly say on the subject: that this interview was imposed upon me: by those, indeed, who had a right to impose it: but that it was sorely against my will complied with: and for this reason, that there was <em>aversion</em>, not <em>wilfulness</em>, in the case; and so nothing could come of it, but a pretence, as I much apprehended, to use me still more severely than I had been used.</p>
					<p>She was then pleased to charge me with prepossession and prejudice. She expatiated upon the duty of a child. She imputed to me abundance of fine qualities; but told me, that, in this case, <em>that</em> of persuadableness was wanting to crown all. She insisted upon the <em>merit</em> of obedience, although my will were <em>not</em> in it. From a little hint I gave of my still greater dislike to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes, on account of the freedom I had treated him with, she talked to me of his forgiving disposition; of his infinite respect for me; and I cannot tell what of this sort.</p>
					<p>I never found myself so fretful in my life: and so I told my aunt; and begged her pardon for it. But she said, it was well disguised then; for she saw nothing but little tremors, which were usual with young ladies when they were to see their admirers for the first time; and this might be called so, with respect to me; since it was the first time I had consented to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes in that light⁠—but that the <em>next</em>⁠—</p>
					<p>How, Madam, interrupted I⁠—Is it then imagined, that I give this meeting on that footing?</p>
					<p>To be sure it is, Child.</p>
					<p><em>To be sure it is</em>, Madam! Then I do yet desire to decline it.⁠—I will not, I cannot, see him, if he expects me to see him upon those terms.</p>
					<p>Niceness, punctilio, mere punctilio, Niece!⁠—Can you think that your appointment, (day, place, hour,) and knowing what the intent of it was, is to be interpreted away as a mere ceremony, and to mean nothing?⁠—Let me tell you, my dear, your father, mother, uncles, everybody, respect this appointment as the first act of your compliance with their wills: and therefore recede not, I desire you; but make a merit of what cannot be avoided.</p>
					<p>O the hideous wretch!⁠—Pardon me, Madam.⁠—<em>I</em> to be supposed to meet such a man as <em>that</em>, with such a view! and he to be armed with such an expectation!⁠—But it cannot be that he expects it, whatever <em>others</em> may do.⁠—It is plain he cannot, by the fears he tells you all he shall have to see me. If his <em>hope</em> were so audacious, he could not <em>fear</em> so much.</p>
					<p>Indeed, he <em>has</em> this hope; and justly founded too. But his fear arises from his reverence, as I told you before.</p>
					<p>His <em>reverence</em>!⁠—his unworthiness!⁠—’Tis so apparent, that even he himself sees it, as well as everybody else. Hence his offers to purchase me! Hence it is, that settlements are to make up for acknowledged want of merit!</p>
					<p>His <em>unworthiness</em>, say you!⁠—Not so fast, my dear. Does not this look like setting a high value upon yourself?⁠—We all have exalted notions of your merit, Niece; but nevertheless, it would not be wrong, if you were to arrogate less to yourself; though more were to be your due than your friends attribute to you.</p>
					<p>I am sorry, Madam, it should be thought arrogance in me, to suppose I am not worthy of a better man than <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes, both as to person and mind: and as to fortune, I thank God I despise all that can be insisted upon in his favour from so poor a plea.</p>
					<p>She told me, It signified nothing to talk: I knew the expectation of everyone.</p>
					<p>Indeed I did not. It was impossible I could think of such a strange expectation, upon a compliance made only to show I would comply in all that was in my power to comply with.</p>
					<p>I might easily, she said, have supposed, that everyone thought I was beginning to oblige them all, by the kind behaviour of my brother and sister to me in the garden, last Sunday; by my sister’s visit to me afterwards in my chamber (although <em>both more stiffly received by me</em>, than were either wished or expected); by my uncle Harlowe’s affectionate visit to me the same afternoon, not indeed <em>so very gratefully received</em> as I used to receive his favours:⁠—but this he kindly imputed to the displeasure I had conceived at my confinement, and to my intention to come off by degrees, that I might keep myself in countenance for my past opposition.</p>
					<p>See, my dear, the low cunning of that Sunday-management, which then so much surprised me! And see the reason why <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lewen was admitted to visit me, yet forbore to enter upon a subject about which I thought he came to talk to me!⁠—For it seems there was no occasion to dispute with me on the point I was to be <em>supposed</em> to have conceded to.⁠—See, also, how unfairly my brother and sister must have represented their pretended kindness, when (though they had an end to answer by <em>appearing</em> kind) their antipathy to me seems to have been so strong, that they could not help insulting me by their arm-in-arm lover-like behaviour to each other; as my sister afterwards likewise did, when she came to borrow my Kempis.</p>
					<p>I lifted up my hands and eyes! I cannot, said I, give <em>this</em> treatment a name! The <em>end</em> so unlikely to be answered by <em>means</em> so low! I know <em>whose</em> the whole is! He that could get my uncle Harlowe to contribute his part, and to procure the acquiescence of the rest of my friends to it, must have the power to do anything with them against me.</p>
					<p>Again my aunt told me, that talking and invective, now I had given the expectation, would signify nothing. She hoped I would not show everyone, that they had been too forward in their constructions of my desire to oblige them. She could assure me, that it would be worse for me, if <em>now</em> I receded, than if I had never advanced.</p>
					<p><em>Advanced</em>, Madam! How can you say <em>advanced</em>? Why, this is a trick upon me! A poor low trick! Pardon me, Madam, I don’t say you have a hand in it.⁠—But, my dearest Aunt, tell me, Will not my mother be present at this dreaded interview? Will she not so far favour me? Were it but to qualify⁠—</p>
					<p><em>Qualify</em>, my dear, interrupted she⁠—your mother, and your uncle Harlowe would not be present on this occasion for the world⁠—</p>
					<p>O then, Madam, how can they look upon my consent to this interview as an <em>advance</em>?</p>
					<p>My aunt was displeased at this home-push. Miss Clary, said she, there is no dealing with you. It would be happy for you, and for everybody else, were your obedience as ready as your wit. I will leave you⁠—</p>
					<p>Not in anger, I hope, Madam, interrupted I⁠—all I meant was, to observe, that let the meeting issue as it may, and as it <em>must</em> issue, it cannot be a disappointment to <em>anybody</em>.</p>
					<p>O Miss! you seem to be a very determined young creature. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes will be here at your time: and remember once more, that upon the coming afternoon depend upon the peace of your whole family, and your own happiness.</p>
					<p>And so saying, down she hurried.</p>
					<p>Here I will stop. In what way I shall resume, or when, is not left to me to conjecture; much less determine. I am excessively uneasy!⁠—No good news from your mother, I doubt!⁠—I will deposit thus far, for fear of the worst.</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Adieu, my best, rather, my <em>only</em> friend!</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
