<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 20: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-20" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>I have this moment intelligence from Simon Parsons, one of Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr>’s stewards, that his Lordship is very ill. Simon, who is my obsequious servant, in virtue of my presumptive heirship, gives me a hint in his letter, that my presence at M. Hall will not be amiss. So I must accelerate, whatever be the course I shall be allowed or compelled to take.</p>
					<p>No bad prospects for this charming creature, if the old peer would be so kind as to surrender; and many a summons has this gout given him. A good £8,000 a-year, and perhaps the title reversionary, or a still higher, would help me up with her.</p>
					<p>Proudly as this lady pretends to be above all pride, grandeur will have its charms with her; for grandeur always makes a man’s face shine in a woman’s eye. I have a pretty good, because a clear, estate, as it is. But what a noble variety of mischief will £8,000 a-year, enable a man to do?</p>
					<p>Perhaps thou’lt say, I do <em>already</em> all that comes into my head; but that’s a mistake⁠—not one half I will assure thee. And even <em>good folks</em>, as I have heard, love to have the <em>power</em> of doing mischief, whether they make <em>use of it</em> or <em>not</em>. The late Queen Anne, who was a very good woman, was always fond of <em>prerogative</em>. And her ministers, in her name, in more instances than one, made a <em>ministerial</em> use of this her foible.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>But now, at last, am I to be admitted to the presence of my angry fair-one; after three denials, nevertheless; and a <em>peremptory</em> from me, by Dorcas, that I must see her in her chamber, if I cannot see her in the dining-room.</p>
					<p>Dorcas, however, tells me that she says, if she were at her own liberty, she would never see me more; and that she had been asking after the characters and conditions of the neighbours. I suppose, now she has found her voice, to call out for help from them, if there were any to hear her.</p>
					<p>She will have it now, it seems, that I had the wickedness from the very beginning, to contrive, for her ruin, a house so convenient for dreadful mischief.</p>
					<p>Dorcas begs of her to be pacified⁠—entreats her to see me with patience⁠—tells her that I am one of the most determined of men, as she has heard say. That gentleness may do with me; but that nothing else will, she believes. And what, as her ladyship (as she always styles her,) is <em>married</em>, if I <em>had</em> broken my oath, or <em>intended</em> to break it!⁠—</p>
					<p>She hinted plain enough to the honest wench, that she was <em>not</em> married. But Dorcas would not understand her.</p>
					<p>This shows she is resolved to keep no measures. And now is to be a trial of skill, whether she shall or not.</p>
					<p>Dorcas has hinted to her my Lord’s illness, as a piece of intelligence that dropped in conversation from me.</p>
					<p>But here I stop. My beloved, pursuant to my peremptory message, is just gone up into the dining-room.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
