<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 59: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Mrs. Hodges Enfield</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-59" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hodges Enfield</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">
							<time datetime="06-22">June 22</time>
						</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:salutation"><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hodges,</p>
					</header>
					<p>I am under a kind of necessity to write to you, having no one among my relations to whom I dare write, or hope a line from if I did. It is but to answer a question. It is this:</p>
					<p>Whether you know any such man as Captain Tomlinson? and, if you do, whether he be very intimate with my uncle Harlowe?</p>
					<p>I will describe his person lest, possibly, he should go by another name among you; although I know not why he should.</p>
					<p>“He is a thin, tallish man, a little pock-fretten, of a sallowish complexion. Fifty years of age, or more. Of good aspect when he looks up. He seems to be a serious man, and one who knows the world. He stoops a little in the shoulders. Is of Berkshire. His wife of Oxfordshire; and has several children. He removed lately into your parts form Northamptonshire.”</p>
					<p>I must desire you, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hodges, that you will not let my uncle, nor any of my relations, know that I write to you.</p>
					<p>You used to say, that you would be glad to have it in your power to serve me. That, indeed, was in my prosperity. But, I dare say, you will not refuse me in a particular that will oblige me, without hurting yourself.</p>
					<p>I understand that my father, mother, and sister, and I presume, my brother, and my uncle Antony, are to be at my uncle Harlowe’s this day. God preserve them all, and may they rejoice in many happy birthdays! You will write six words to me concerning their healths.</p>
					<p>Direct, for a particular reason, to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Dorothy Salcombe, to be left till called for, at the Four Swans Inn, Bishopsgate-street.</p>
					<p>You know my handwriting well enough, were not the contents of the letter sufficient to excuse my name, or any other subscription, than that of</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your friend.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
