<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 57: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-57" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Wednesday Morning, <time datetime="1738-04-26">April 26</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>Your letter, my beloved Miss Howe, gives me great comfort. How sweetly do I experience the truth of the wise man’s observation, <q>That a faithful friend is the medicine of life!</q></p>
					<p>Your messenger finds me just setting out for London: the chaise at the door. Already I have taken leave of the good widow, who has obliged me with the company of her eldest daughter, at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s request, while he rides by us. The young gentlewoman is to return in two or three days with the chaise, in its way to my Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr>’s Hertfordshire seat.</p>
					<p>I received my sister’s dreadful letter on Sunday, when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace was out. He saw, on his return, my <em>extreme anguish and dejection</em>; and he was told <em>how much worse I had been</em>: for I had fainted away more than once.</p>
					<p>I think the contents of it have touched my head as well as my heart.</p>
					<p>He would fain have seen it. But I would not permit that, because of the threatenings he would have found in it against himself. As it <em>was</em>, the effect it had upon me made him break out into execrations and menaces. I was so ill that he himself advised me to delay going to town on Monday, as I proposed to do.</p>
					<p>He is extremely regardful and tender of me. All that you supposed <em>would</em> follow the violent letter, from him, <em>has</em> followed it. He has offered himself to my acceptance in so unreserved a manner, that I am concerned I have written so freely and diffidently of him. Pray, my dearest friend, keep to yourself everything that may appear disreputable of him from me.</p>
					<p>I must acquaint you that his kind behaviour, and my low-spiritedness, cooperating with your former advice, and my unhappy situation, made me that very Sunday evening <em>receive unreservedly his declarations</em>: and now indeed I am more in his power than ever.</p>
					<p>He presses me every hour (indeed as <em>needlessly</em>, as <em>unkindly</em>) for fresh tokens of my esteem <em>for</em> him, and confidence in him. And as I have been brought to <em>some verbal concessions</em>, if he should prove unworthy, I am sure I shall have great reason to blame this violent letter: for I have no resolution at all. Abandoned thus of all my natural friends, of whose returning favour I have now no hopes, and only you to pity me, and you restrained, as I may say, I have been forced to turn my desolate heart to such protection as I could find.</p>
					<p>All my comfort is, that your advice repeatedly given me to the same purpose, in your kind letter before me, warrants me. I now set out the more cheerfully to London on that account: for, before, a heavy weight hung upon my heart; and although I thought it best and safest to go, yet my spirits sunk, I know not why, at every motion I made towards a preparation for it.</p>
					<p>I hope no mischief will happen on the road.⁠—I hope these violent spirits will not meet.</p>
					<p>Everyone is waiting for me.⁠—Pardon me, my best, my kindest friend, that I return your <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Norris</i>. In these more promising prospects, I cannot have occasion for your favour. Besides, I have some hope that with my clothes they will send me the money I wrote for, although it is denied me in the letter. If they do not, and if I should have occasion, I can but signify my wants to so ready a friend. And I have promised to be obliged only to you. But I had rather methinks you should have it <em>still to say</em>, if challenged, that nothing of this nature has been either requested or done. I say this with a view entirely to my future hopes of recovering your mother’s favour, which, next to that of my own father and mother, I am most solicitous to recover.</p>
					<p>I must acquaint you with one thing more, notwithstanding my hurry; and that is, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace offered either to attend me to Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr>’s, or to send for his chaplain, yesterday. He pressed me to consent to this proposal most earnestly, and even seemed desirous rather to have the ceremony pass here than at London: for when there, I had told him, it was time enough to consider of so weighty and important a matter. Now, upon the receipt of your kind, your consolatory letter, methinks I could almost wish it had been <em>in my power</em> to comply with his earnest solicitations. But this dreadful letter <em>has unhinged my whole frame</em>. Then some <em>little punctilio</em> surely is necessary. No preparation made. No articles drawn. No license ready. Grief so extreme: no pleasure in prospect, nor so much as in wish⁠—O my dear, who could think of entering into so solemn an engagement? Who, <em>so</em> unprepared, could seem to be <em>so</em> ready?</p>
					<p>If I could flatter myself that my indifference to all the joys of this life proceeded from <em>proper</em> motives, not rather from the disappointments and mortifications my pride has met with, how much rather, I think, should I choose to be wedded to my shroud than to any man on earth!</p>
					<p>Indeed I have at present no pleasure but in your friendship. Continue that to me, I beseech you. If my heart rises hereafter to a capacity of more, it must be built on that foundation.</p>
					<p>My spirits sink again on setting out. Excuse this depth of vapourish dejection, which forbids me even <em>hope</em>, the cordial that keeps life from stagnating, and which never was denied me till within these eight-and-forty hours.</p>
					<p>But ’tis time to relieve you.</p>
					<p>Adieu, my best beloved and kindest friend! Pray for your</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><strong>Clarissa</strong>.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
