<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 45: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Arabella Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-45" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Arabella Harlowe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday, <time datetime="07-21">July 21</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>If, my dearest Sister, I did not think the state of my health very precarious, and that it was my duty to take this step, I should hardly have dared to approach you, although but with my pen, after having found your censures so dreadfully justified as they have been.</p>
					<p>I have not the courage to write to my father himself, nor yet to my mother. And it is with trembling that I address myself to you, to beg of you to intercede for me, that my father will have the goodness to revoke that heaviest part of the very heavy curse he laid upon me, which relates to <b>Hereafter</b>; for, as to the <b>Here</b>, I have<em>I have</em> indeed <em>met with my punishment from the very wretch in whom I was supposed to place my confidence.</em></p>
					<p>As I hope not for restoration to favour, I may be allowed to be very earnest on this head: yet will I not use any arguments in support of my request, because I am sure my father, were it in his power, would not have his poor child miserable forever.</p>
					<p>I have the most grateful sense of my mother’s goodness in sending me up my clothes. I would have acknowledged the favour the moment I received them, with the most thankful duty, but that I feared any line from me would be unacceptable.</p>
					<p>I would not give fresh offence: so will decline all other commendations of duty and love: appealing to my heart for both, where <em>both</em> are flaming with an ardour that nothing but death can extinguish: therefore only subscribe myself, without so much as a name,</p>
					<p>My dear and happy Sister,</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your afflicted servant.</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:postscript">A letter directed for me, at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith’s, a glover, in King-street, Covent-garden, will come to hand.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
