<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter XLIII: Mr. Lovelace, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-43" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p class="explanatory">[Superscribed to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lovelace]</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline"><abbr class="name">M.</abbr> Hall, <abbr>Wed.</abbr> Morning, One o’clock, <time datetime="06-28">June 28</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>Not one line, my dearest life, not one word, in answer to three letters I have written! The time is now so short, that this <em>must</em> be the last letter that can reach you on this side the important hour that might make us legally one.</p>
					<p>My friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, is apprehensive, that he cannot wait upon you in time, by reason of some urgent affairs of his own.</p>
					<p>I the less regret the disappointment, because I have procured a <em>more</em> acceptable person, as I hope, to attend you; Captain Tomlinson I mean: to whom I had applied for this purpose, before I had <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford’s answer.</p>
					<p>I was the more solicitous to obtain his favour from him, because of the office he is to take upon him, as I humbly presume to hope, tomorrow. That office obliged him to be in town as this day: and I acquainted him with my unhappy situation with you; and desired that he would show me, on this occasion, that I had as much of his favour and friendship as your uncle had; since the whole treaty must be broken off, if he could not prevail upon you in my behalf.</p>
					<p>He will dispatch the messenger directly; whom I propose to meet in person at Slough; either to proceed onward to London with a joyful heart, or to return back to <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> Hall with a broken one.</p>
					<p>I ought not (but cannot help it) to anticipate the pleasure <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tomlinson proposes to himself, in acquainting you with the likelihood there is of your mother’s seconding your uncle’s views. For, it seems, he has privately communicated to her his laudable intentions: and <em>her</em> resolution depends, as well as <em>his</em>, upon what tomorrow will produce.</p>
					<p>Disappoint not then, I beseech you, for an hundred persons’ sakes, as well as for mine, <em>that</em> uncle and <em>that</em> mother, whose displeasure I have heard you so often deplore.</p>
					<p>You may think it impossible for me to reach London by the canonical hour. If it should, the ceremony may be performed in your own apartments, at any time in the day, or at night: so that Captain Tomlinson may have it to aver to your uncle, that it was performed on his anniversary.</p>
					<p>Tell but the Captain, that you <em>forbid me not</em> to attend you: and that shall be sufficient for bringing to you, on the wings of love,</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your ever-grateful and affectionate</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Lovelace.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
