<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 12: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline"><abbr class="name">M.</abbr> Hall, <abbr>Sat.</abbr> Night, <time datetime="06-15">June 15</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>All undone, undone, by Jupiter!⁠—Zounds, Jack, what shall I do now! a curse upon all my plots and contrivances!⁠—But I have it⁠—in the very heart and soul of me I have it!</p>
					<p>Thou toldest me, that my punishments were but beginning⁠—Canst thou, O fatal prognosticator, cans thou tell me, where they will end?</p>
					<p>Thy assistance I bespeak. The moment thou receivest this, I bespeak thy assistance. This messenger rides for life and death⁠—and I hope he’ll find you at your town-lodgings; if he meet not with you at Edgware; where, being Sunday, he will call first.</p>
					<p>This cursed, cursed woman, on Friday dispatched man and horse with the joyful news (as she thought it would be to me) in an exulting letter from Sally Martin, that she had found out my angel as on Wednesday last; and on Friday morning, after she had been at prayers at Covent-Garden church⁠—praying for my reformation perhaps⁠—got her arrested by two sheriff’s officers, as she was returning to her lodgings, who (villains!) put her into a chair they had in readiness, and carried her to one of the cursed fellow’s houses.</p>
					<p>She has arrested her for £150 pretendedly due for board and lodging: a sum (besides the low villany of the proceeding) which the dear soul could not possibly raise: all her clothes and effects, except what she had on and with her when she went away, being at the old devil’s.</p>
					<p>And here, for an aggravation, has the dear creature lain already two days; for I must be gallanting my two aunts and my two cousins, and giving Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> an airing after his lying-in⁠—pox upon the whole family of us! and returned not till within this hour: and now returned to my distraction, on receiving the cursed tidings, and the exulting letter.</p>
					<p>Hasten, hasten, dear Jack; for the love of God, hasten to the injured charmer! my heart bleeds for her!⁠—she deserved not this!⁠—I dare not stir. It will be thought done by my contrivance⁠—and if I am absent from this place, that will confirm the suspicion.</p>
					<p>Damnation seize quick this accursed woman!⁠—Yet she thinks she has made no small merit with me. Unhappy, thrice unhappy circumstances!⁠—At a time too, when better prospects were opening for the sweet creature!</p>
					<p>Hasten to her!⁠—Clear me of this cursed job. Most sincerely, by all that’s sacred, I swear you may!⁠—Yet have I been such a villanous plotter, that the charming sufferer will hardly believe it: although the proceeding be so dirtily low.</p>
					<p>Set her free the moment you see her: without conditioning, free!⁠—On your knees, for me, beg her pardon: and assure her, that, wherever she goes, I will not molest her: no, nor come near her without her leave: and be sure allow not any of the d⸺d crew to go near her⁠—only let her permit <em>you</em> to receive her commands from time to time.⁠—You have always been her friend and advocate. What would I now give, had I permitted you to have been a successful one!</p>
					<p>Let her have all her clothes and effects sent her instantly, as a small proof of my sincerity. And force upon the dear creature, who must be moneyless, what sums you can get her to take. Let me know how she has been treated. If roughly, woe be to the guilty!</p>
					<p>Take thy watch in thy hand, after thou hast freed her, and d⸺n the whole brood, dragon and serpents, by the hour, till thou’rt tired; and tell them, I bid thee do so for their cursed officiousness.</p>
					<p>They had nothing to do when they had found her, but to wait my orders how to proceed.</p>
					<p>The great devil fly away with them all, one by one, through the roof of their own cursed house, and dash them to pieces against the tops of chimneys as he flies; and let the lesser devils collect the scattered scraps, and bag them up, in order to put them together again in their allotted place, in the element of fire, with cements of molten lead.</p>
					<p><em>A line! a line! a kingdom for a line!</em> with tolerable news, the first moment thou canst write!⁠—This fellow waits to bring it.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
