<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 37: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-37" epub:type="chapter z3998:letter">
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</span>
				</h2>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Wedn. Morning, <time datetime="1738-04-19">April 19</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>I am glad, my dear friend, that you approve of my removal to London.</p>
				<p>The disagreement between your mother and you gives me inexpressible affliction. I hope I think you both more unhappy than you are. But I beseech you let me know the particulars of the debate you call a very pretty one. I am well acquainted with your dialect. When I am informed of the whole, let your mother have been ever so severe upon me, I shall be easier a great deal.⁠—Faulty people should rather deplore the occasion they have given for anger than resent it.</p>
				<p>If I am to be obliged to any body in England for money, it shall be to you. Your mother need not know of your kindness to me, you say⁠—but she must know it, if it be done, and if she challenge my beloved friend upon it; for would you either falsify or prevaricate?⁠—I wish your mother could be made easy on this head⁠—forgive me, my dear⁠—but I know⁠—Yet once she had a better opinion of me.⁠—O my inconsiderate rashness!⁠—Excuse me once more, I pray you.⁠—Pride, when it is native, will shew itself sometimes in the midst of mortifications⁠—but my stomach is down already.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>I am unhappy that I cannot have my worthy Hannah. I am sorry for the poor creature’s illness as for my own disappointment by it. Come, my dear Miss Howe, since you press me to be beholden to you: and would think me proud if I absolutely refused your favour; pray be so good as to send her two guineas in my name.</p>
				<p>If I have nothing for it, as you say, but matrimony, it yields little comfort, that his relations do not despise the fugitive, as persons of their rank and quality-pride might be supposed to do, for having been a fugitive.</p>
				<p>But O my cruel, thrice cruel uncle! to suppose⁠—but my heart checks my pen, and will not let it proceed, on an intimation so extremely shocking as that which he supposes!⁠—Yet, if thus they have been persuaded, no wonder if they are irreconcilable.</p>
				<p>This is all my hard-hearted brother’s doings!⁠—His surmisings:⁠—God forgive him⁠—prays his injured sister!</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
