<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 37: Miss Howe, to Miss Arabella Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-37" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Howe, to Miss Arabella Harlowe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sat. <time datetime="1738-07-22">July 22</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>It may be the <em>misfortune</em> of some people to engage <em>everybody’s</em> notice: others may be the <em>happier</em>, though they may be the more <em>envious</em>, for nobody’s thinking them worthy of any. But one would be glad people had the sense to be thankful for that want of consequence, which subject them not to hazards they would heartily have been able to manage under.</p>
					<p>I own to you, that had it not been for the prudent advice of that admirable somebody (whose principal fault is the superiority of her talents, and whose misfortune to be brother’d and sister’d by a couple of creatures, who are not able to comprehend her excellencies) I might at one time have been plunged into difficulties. But pert as the superlatively pert may think me, I thought not myself <em>wiser</em>, because I was <em>older</em>; nor for that <em>poor</em> reason qualified to prescribe to, much less to maltreat, a genius so superior.</p>
					<p>I repeat it with gratitude, that the dear creature’s advice was of very great service to me⁠—and this before my mother’s <em>watchfulness</em> became necessary. But how it would have fared with me, I cannot say, had I had a brother or sister, who had deemed it their <em>interest</em>, as well as a gratification of their <em>sordid envy</em>, to misrepresent me.</p>
					<p>Your admirable sister, in effect, saved <em>you</em>, Miss, as well as <em>me</em>⁠—with this difference⁠—you, <em>against</em> your will⁠—me <em>with</em> mine: and but for <em>your</em> own brother, and <em>his</em> own sister, would not have been lost herself.</p>
					<p>Would to Heaven both sisters had been obliged with their own wills!⁠—the most admirable of her sex would never then have been out of her father’s house!⁠—<em>you</em>, Miss⁠—I don’t know what had become of <em>you</em>.⁠—But, let what would have happened, you would have met with the humanity you have not shown, whether you had deserved it or not:⁠—nor, at the worst, lost either a kind sister, or a pitying friend, in the most excellent of sisters.</p>
					<p>But why run I into length to such a poor thing? why push I so weak an adversary? whose first letter is all low malice, and whose next is made up of falsehood and inconsistence, as well as spite and ill-manners! yet I was willing to give you a <em>part</em> of my mind. Call for more of it; it shall be at your service: from one, who, though she thanks God she is not your <em>sister</em>, is not your <em>enemy</em>: but that she is <em>not</em> the latter, is withheld but by two considerations; one that you bear, though unworthily, a relation to a sister so excellent; the other, that you are not of consequence enough to engage anything but the pity and contempt of</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">
							<abbr class="name">A. H.</abbr>
						</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
