<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 14: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-4-14" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday, <time datetime="1738-05-02">May 2</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>Just as I had sealed up the enclosed, comes a letter to my beloved, in a cover to me, directed to Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr>’s. From whom, thinkest thou?⁠—From <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howe!</p>
					<p>And what the contents?</p>
					<p>How should I know, unless the dear creature had communicated them to me? But a very cruel letter I believe it is, <em>by the effect it had upon her</em>. The tears ran down her cheeks as she read it; and her colour changed several times. No end of her persecutions, I think!</p>
					<p>“What a cruelty in my fate!” said the sweet lamenter.⁠—“Now the <em>only</em> comfort of my life must be given up!”</p>
					<p>Miss Howe’s correspondence, no doubt.</p>
					<p>But <em>should</em> she be so much grieved at this? This correspondence was prohibited before, and that, to the <em>daughter</em>, in the strongest terms: but yet carried on by both; although a <em>brace of impeccables</em>, an’t please ye. Could they expect, that a mother would not vindicate her authority?⁠—and finding her prohibition ineffectual with her perverse <em>daughter</em>, was it not reasonable to suppose she would try what effect it would have upon her <em>daughter’s friend</em>?⁠—And now I believe the end will be effectually answered: for my beloved, I dare say, will make a point of conscience of it.</p>
					<p>I hate cruelty, especially in <em>women</em>; and should have been more concerned for this instance of it in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howe, had I not had a stronger instance of the same in my beloved to Miss Partington: For how did she know, since she was so much afraid for <em>herself</em>, whom Dorcas might let in to that innocent and <em>less watchful</em> young lady? But nevertheless I must needs own, that I am not very sorry for this prohibition, let it <em>originally</em> come from the <em>Harlowes</em>, or <em>from whom it will</em>; because I make no doubt, that it is owing to Miss Howe, in a great measure, that my beloved is so much upon her guard, and thinks so hardly of me. And who can tell, <q>as characters here are so tender</q>, and <q>some disguises so flimsy</q>, what consequences might follow this undutiful correspondence?⁠—I say, therefore, I am not sorry for it: now will she not have anybody to compare notes with: anybody to alarm her: and I may be saved the guilt and disobligation of inspecting into a correspondence that has long made me uneasy.</p>
					<p>How everything works for me!⁠—Why will this charming creature make <em>such contrivances</em> necessary, as will increase my trouble, and my guilt too, as some will account it? But why, rather I should ask, will she fight against her stars?</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
