<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter II: Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-4-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p class="explanatory">[With her two last letters, <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LVIII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LIX</span>, of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, enclosed]</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday Night, <time datetime="04-27">April 27</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>I have yours; just brought me. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman has helped me to a lucky expedient, which, with the assistance of the post, will enable me to correspond with you every day. An honest higler, (Simon Collins his name), by whom I shall send this, and the two enclosed, (now I have your direction whither), goes to town constantly on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays; and can bring back to me from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilson’s what you shall have caused to be left for me.</p>
					<p>I congratulate you on your arrival in town, so much amended in spirits. I must be brief. I hope you’ll have no cause to repent returning my Norris. It is forthcoming on demand.</p>
					<p>I am sorry your Hannah can’t be with you. She is very ill still; but not dangerously.</p>
					<p>I long for your account of the women you are with. If they are not right people, you will find them out in one breakfasting.</p>
					<p>I know not what to write upon his reporting to them that you are actually married. His reasons for it are plausible. But he delights in odd expedients and inventions.</p>
					<p>Whether you like the people or not, do not, by your noble sincerity and plain dealing, make yourself enemies. You are in the real <em>world</em> now you know.</p>
					<p>I am glad you had thoughts of taking him at his offer, if he had re-urged it. I wonder he did not. But if he do not soon, and in such a way as you <em>can</em> accept of it, don’t think of staying with him.</p>
					<p>Depend upon it, my dear, he will not leave you, either night or day, if he can help it, now he has got footing.</p>
					<p>I should have abhorred him for his report of your marriage, had he not made it with such circumstances as leave it still in your power to keep him at distance. If once he offer at the <em>least</em> familiarity⁠—but this is needless to say to you. He can have, I think, no other design but what he professes; because he must needs think, that his report of being married to you must increase your vigilance.</p>
					<p>You may depend upon my looking narrowly into the sealings of your letters. If, as you say, he be base in that point, he will be so in everything. But to a person of your merit, of your fortune, of your virtue, he cannot be base. The man is no fool. It is his interest, as well with regard to his expectations from his own friends, as from you, to be honest. Would to Heaven, however, you were <em>really</em> married! This is now the predominant wish of</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Anna Howe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
