<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 61: Mr. Belford, to Robert Lovelace, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-61" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Robert Lovelace, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tues. <time datetime="09-09"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 9</time> in the <abbr>Morn.</abbr> at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith’s</p>
					</header>
					<p>When I read yours of this morning, I could not help pitying you for the account you give of the dreadful anxiety and suspense you labour under. I wish from my heart all were to end as you are so willing to hope: but it will not be; and your suspense, if the worst part of your torment, as you say it is, will soon be over; but, alas! in a way you wish not.</p>
					<p>I attended the lady just now. She is extremely ill: yet is she aiming at an answer to her Norton’s letter, which she began yesterday in her own chamber, and has written a good deal: but in a hand not like her own fine one, as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lovick tells me, but larger, and the lines crooked.</p>
					<p>I have accepted of the offer of a room adjoining to the widow Lovick’s, till I see how matters go; but unknown to the lady; and I shall go home every night, for a few hours. I would not lose a sentence that I could gain from lips so instructive, nor the opportunity of receiving any command from her, for an estate.</p>
					<p>In this my new apartment I now write, and shall continue to write, as occasions offer, that I may be the more circumstantial: but I depend upon the return of my letters, or copies of them, on demand, that I may have together all that relates to this affecting story; which I shall re-peruse with melancholy pleasure to the end of my life.</p>
					<p>I think I will send thee Brand’s letter to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Harlowe, recanting his base surmises. It is a matchless piece of pedantry; and may perhaps a little divert thy deep chagrin: some time hence at least it may, if not now.</p>
					<p>What wretched creatures are there in the world! What strangely mixed creatures!⁠—So sensible and so silly at the same time! What a <em>various</em>, what a <em>foolish</em> creature is man!⁠—</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Three o’clock.</p>
					<p>The lady has just finished her letter, and has entertained <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lovick, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith, and me, with a noble discourse on the vanity and brevity of life, to which I cannot do justice in the repetition: and indeed I am so grieved for her, that, ill as she is, my intellects are not half so clear as hers.</p>
					<p>A few things which made the strongest impression upon me, as well from the sentiments themselves as from her manner of uttering them, I remember. She introduced them thus:</p>
					<p>I am thinking, said she, what a gradual and happy death God Almighty (blessed be his name) affords me! Who would have thought, that, suffering what I have suffered, and abandoned as I have been, with such a tender education as I have had, I should be so long a dying!⁠—But see now by little and little it had come to this. I was first taken off from the power of <em>walking</em>; then I took a <em>coach</em>⁠—a coach grew too violent an exercise: then I took up a <em>chair</em>⁠—the prison was a large <strong>death-stride</strong> upon me⁠—I should have <em>suffered longer else</em>!⁠—Next, I was unable to go to <em>church</em>; then to go <em>up</em> or <em>down stairs</em>; now hardly can move from one <em>room</em> to <em>another</em>: and a <em>less</em> room will soon hold me.⁠—My <em>eyes</em> begin to fail me, so that at times I cannot see to read distinctly; and now I can hardly <em>write</em>, or hold a pen.⁠—Next, I presume, I shall know nobody, nor be able to thank any of you; I therefore now once more thank you, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lovick, and you, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith, and you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, while I <em>can</em> thank you, for all your kindness to me. And thus by little and little, in such a gradual sensible death as I am blessed with, God <em>dies away in us</em>, as I may say, all human satisfaction, in order to subdue his poor creatures to himself.</p>
					<p>Thou mayest guess how affected we all were at this moving account of her progressive weakness. We heard it with wet eyes; for what with the women’s example, and what with her moving eloquence, I could no more help it than they. But we were silent nevertheless; and she went on applying herself to me.</p>
					<p>O <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford! This is a poor transitory life in the best enjoyments. We flutter about here and there, with all our vanities about us, like painted butterflies, for a gay, but a very short season, till at last we lay ourselves down in a quiescent state, and turn into vile worms: And who knows in what form, or to what condition we shall rise again?</p>
					<p>I wish you would permit me, a young creature, just turned of nineteen years of age, blooming and healthy as I was a few months ago, now nipt by the cold hand of death, to influence you, in <em>these my last hours</em>, to a life of regularity and repentance for any past evils you may have been guilty of. For, believe me, Sir, that now, in this last stage, very few things will bear the test, or be passed as laudable, if <em>pardonable</em>, at our own bar, much less at a more tremendous one, in all we have done, or delighted in, even in a life not very offensive neither, as <em>we</em> may think!⁠—Ought we not then to study in our <em>full day</em>, before the dark hours approach, so to live, as may afford reflections that will soften the agony of the last moments when they come, and let in upon the departing soul a ray of Divine mercy to illuminate its passage into an awful eternity?</p>
					<p>She was ready to faint, and choosing to lie down, I withdrew; I need not say with a melancholy heart: and when I got to my new-taken apartment, my heart was still more affected by the sight of the solemn letter the admirable lady had so lately finished. It was communicated to me by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lovick; who had it to copy for me; but it was not to be <em>delivered to me</em> till after her departure. However, I trespassed so far, as to prevail upon the widow to let me take a copy of it; which I did directly in character.</p>
					<p>I send it enclosed. If thou canst read it, and thy heart not bleed at thy eyes, thy remorse can hardly be so deep as thou hast inclined me to think it is.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
