<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter XLVI: To Robert Lovelace, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-46" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">To Robert Lovelace, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Wedn. <time datetime="06-28">June 28</time>, Near Twelve o’clock</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Honoured Sir,</p>
					</header>
					<p>I received yours, as your servant desired me to acquaint you, <em>by ten this morning</em>. Horse and man were in a foam.</p>
					<p>I instantly equipped myself, as if come off from a journey, and posted away to the lady, intending to plead great affairs that I came not before, in order to favour your <em>antedate</em>; and likewise to be in a <em>hurry</em>, to have a pretence to <em>hurry her ladyship</em>, and to take no denial for her giving a <em>satisfactory</em> return to your messenger. But, upon my entering <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sinclair’s house, I found all in the greatest consternation.</p>
					<p>You must not, Sir, be surprised. It is a trouble to me to be the relater of the bad news; but so it is⁠—The lady is gone off! She was missed but half an hour before I came.</p>
					<p>Her waiting-maid is run away, or hitherto is not to be found: so that they conclude it was by her connivance.</p>
					<p>They had sent, before I came, to my honoured masters <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belton, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mowbray, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tourville is out of town.</p>
					<p>High words are passing between Madam Sinclair, and Madam Horton, and Madam Martin; as also with Dorcas. And your servant William threatens to hang or drown himself.</p>
					<p>They have sent to know if they can hear of Mabell, the waiting-maid, at her mother’s, who it seems lives in Chick-lane, West-Smithfield; and to an uncle of hers also, who keeps an alehouse at Cow-cross, had by, and with whom she lived last.</p>
					<p>Your messenger having just changed his horse, is come back: so I will not detain him longer than to add, that I am, with great concern for this misfortune, and thanks for your seasonable favour and kind intentions towards me⁠—I am sure this was not my fault⁠—</p>
					<p>Honoured Sir,</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your most obliged, humble servant,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Patrick M‘Donald.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
