<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter XXXVIII: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-38" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Wednesday, <time datetime="09-20"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 20</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>I write to demand back again my last letter. I own it was my mind at the different times I wrote it; and, whatever ailed me, I could not help writing it. Such a gloomy impulse came upon me, and increased as I wrote, that, for my soul, I could not forbear running into the miserable.</p>
					<p>’Tis strange, very strange, that a man’s conscience should be able to force his fingers to write whether he will or not; and to run him into a subject he more than once, at the very time, resolved not to think of.</p>
					<p>Nor is it less strange, that (no new reason occurring) he should, in a day or two more, so totally change his mind; have his mind, I should rather say, so wholly illuminated by gay hopes and rising prospects, as to be ashamed of what he had written.</p>
					<p>For, on reperusal of a copy of my letter, which fell into my hands by accident, in the handwriting of my cousin Charlotte, who, unknown to me, had transcribed it, I find it to be such a letter as an enemy would rejoice to see.</p>
					<p>This I know, that were I to have continued but one week more in the way I was in when I wrote the latter part of it, I should have been confined, and in straw, the next; for I now recollect, that all my distemper was returning upon me with irresistible violence⁠—and that in spite of water-gruel and soup-meagre.</p>
					<p>I own I am still excessively grieved at the disappointment this admirable woman made it so much her whimsical choice to give me.</p>
					<p>But, since it has thus fallen out; since she was determined to leave the world; and since she actually ceases <em>to be</em>; ought I, who have such a share of life and health in hand, to indulge gloomy reflections upon an event that is passed; and <em>being</em> passed, cannot be recalled?⁠—Have I not had a specimen of what will be my case, if I do.</p>
					<p>For, Belford, (’tis a folly to deny it,) I have been, to use an old word, quite <em>bestraught</em>.</p>
					<p><em>Why</em>, <em>why did my mother bring me up to bear no control</em>? Why was I so enabled, <em>as that to my very tutors it was a request that I should not know what contradiction or disappointment was</em>?⁠—Ought she not to have known what cruelty there was in her kindness?</p>
					<p>What a punishment, to have my first very great disappointment touch my intellect!⁠—And intellects, once touched⁠—but that I cannot bear to think of⁠—only thus far; the very repentance and amendment, wished me so heartily by my kind and cross dear, have been invalidated and postponed, and who knows for how long?⁠—the <em>amendment</em> at least; can a madman be capable of either?</p>
					<p>Once touched, therefore, I must endeavour to banish those gloomy reflections, which might <em>otherwise</em> have brought on the right turn of mind: and this, to express myself in Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr>’s style, that my wits may not be sent a <em>woolgathering</em>.</p>
					<p>For, let me moreover own to thee, that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hale, who was my good Astolfo, (you read Ariosto, Jack,) and has brought me back my <em>wit-jar</em>, had much ado, by starving, diet, by profuse phlebotomy, by flaying-blisters, eyelet-hole-cupping, a dark room, a midnight solitude in a midday sun, to effect my recovery. And now, for my comfort, he tells me, that I may still have returns upon full moons⁠—horrible! most horrible!⁠—and must be as careful of myself at both equinoctials, as Caesar was warned to be of the Ides of March.</p>
					<p>How my heart sickens at looking back upon what I was! Denied the sun, and all comfort: all my visitors lowborn, tiptoe attendants: even those tiptoe slaves never approaching me but periodically, armed with gallipots, boluses, and cephalic draughts; delivering their orders to me in hated whispers; and answering other curtain-holding impertinents, inquiring how I was, and how I took their execrable potions, whisperingly too! What a cursed still life was this!⁠—Nothing active in me, or about me, but the worm that never dies.</p>
					<p>Again I hasten from the recollection of scenes, which <em>will</em>, at times, obtrude themselves upon me.</p>
					<p>Adieu, Belford!</p>
					<p>But return me my last letter⁠—and build nothing upon its contents. I <em>must</em>, I <em>will</em>, I have <em>already</em>, overcome these fruitless gloominess. Every hour my constitution rises stronger and stronger to befriend me; and, except a tributary sigh now-and-then to the memory of my heart’s beloved, it gives me hope that I shall quickly be what I was⁠—life, spirit, gaiety, and once more the plague of a sex that has been my plague, and will be every man’s plague at one time or other of his life. I repeat my desire, however, that you will write to me as usual. I hope you have good store of particulars by you to communicate, when I can better bear to hear of the dispositions that were made for all that was mortal of my beloved Clarissa.</p>
					<p>But it will be the joy of my heart to be told that her implacable friends are plagued with remorse. Such things as those you may <em>now</em> send me: for company in misery is some relief; especially when a man can think those he hates as miserable as himself.</p>
					<p>One more adieu, Jack!</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
