<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 35: Mr. Belford, to the Right Hon. Lord M.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-35" epub:type="chapter z3998:letter">
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Mr. Belford, to the Right Hon. Lord M</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">London, <time datetime="1738-09-14">Sept. 14</time></p>
				<p>MY LORD,</p>
				<p>I am very apprehensive that the affair between Mr. Lovelace and the late excellent Miss Clarissa Harlowe will be attended with farther bad consequences, notwithstanding her dying injunctions to the contrary. I would, therefore, humbly propose that your Lordship, and his other relations, will forward the purpose your kinsman lately had to go abroad; where I hope he will stay till all is blown over. But as he will not stir, if he knew the true motives of your wishes, the avowed inducement, as I hinted once to Mr. Mowbray, may be such as respects his own health both of person and mind. To Mr. Mowbray and Mr. Tourville all countries are alike; and they perhaps will accompany him.</p>
				<p>I am glad to hear that he is in a way of recovery; but this the rather induces me to press the matter. I think no time should be lost.</p>
				<p>Your Lordship had head that I have the honour to be the executor of this admirable lady's last will. I transcribe from it the following paragraph.</p>
				<pre xml:space="preserve">[He then transcribes the article which so gratefully mentions this nobleman, and the ladies of his family, in relation to the rings she bequeaths them, about which he desires their commands.] </pre>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
