<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 29: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-29" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</span>
				</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Saturday Evening</p>
					</header>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace has seen divers apartments at Windsor; but not one, he says, that he thought fit for me, and which, at the same time, answered my description.</p>
					<p>He has been very solicitous to keep to the letter of my instructions: which looked well: and the better I like him, as, although he proposed that town, he came back, dissuading me from it: for he said, that, in his journey from thence, he had thought Windsor, although of his own proposal, a wrong choice; because I coveted privacy, and that was a place generally visited and admired.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref-89" epub:type="noteref">89</a></p>
					<p>I told him, that if <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sorlings thought me not an incumbrance, I would be willing to stay here a little longer; provided he would leave me, and go to Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr>’s, or to London, which ever he thought best.</p>
					<p>He hoped, he said, that he might suppose me absolutely safe from the insults or attempts of my brother; and, therefore, if it should make me easier, he would obey, for a few days at least.</p>
					<p>He again proposed to send for Hannah. I told him I designed to do so, through you⁠—And shall I beg of you, my dear, to cause the honest creature to be sent to? Your faithful Robert, I think, knows where she is. Perhaps she will be permitted to quit her place directly, by allowing a month’s wages, which I will repay her. He took notice of the serious humour he found me in, and of the redness of my eyes. I had just been answering your letter; and had he not approached me, on his coming off his journey, in a very respectful manner; had he not made an unexceptionable report of his inquiries, and been so ready to go from me, at the very first word; I was prepared (notwithstanding the good terms we parted upon when he set out for Windsor) to have given him a very unwelcome reception: for the contents of your last letter had so affected me, that the moment I saw him, I beheld with indignation the seducer, who had been the cause of all the evils I suffer, and have suffered.</p>
					<p>He hinted to me, that he had received a letter from Lady Betty, and another (as I understood him) from one of the Miss Montagues. If they take notice of me in them, I wonder that he did not acquaint me with the contents. I am afraid, my dear, that his relations are among those who think I have taken a rash and inexcusable step. It is not to my <em>credit</em> to let <em>even them</em> know how I have been <em>frighted out of myself</em>: and yet perhaps they would hold me unworthy of their alliance, if they were to think my flight a voluntary one. O my dear, how uneasy to us are our reflections upon every doubtful occurrence, when we know we have been prevailed upon to do a wrong thing!</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sunday Morning.</p>
					<p>Ah! this man, my dear! We have had warmer dialogues than ever yet we have had. At fair argument, I find I need not fear him;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref-90" epub:type="noteref">90</a> but he is such a wild, such an ungovernable creature (<em>he</em> reformed!) that I am half afraid of him.</p>
					<p>He again, on my declaring myself uneasy at his stay with me here, proposed that I would put myself into Lady Betty’s protection; assuring me that he thought he could not leave me at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sorlings’s with safety to myself. And upon my declining to do that, for the reasons I gave you in my last,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a> he urged me to make a demand of my estate.</p>
					<p>He knew it, I told him, to be my resolution not to litigate with my father.</p>
					<p>Nor would he put me upon it, he replied, but as the <em>last</em> thing. But if my spirit would not permit me to be <em>obliged</em>, as I called it, to anybody, and yet if my relations would refuse me my own, he knew not how I could keep up that spirit, without being put to inconveniences, which would give him infinite concern⁠—Unless⁠—unless⁠—unless, he said, hesitating, as if afraid to speak out⁠—unless I would take the only method I <em>could</em> take, to obtain the possession of my own.</p>
					<p>What is <em>that</em>, Sir?</p>
					<p>Sure the man saw by my looks, when he came with his creeping <q>unless’s</q>, that I guessed what he meant.</p>
					<p>Ah! Madam, can you be at a loss to know what that method is?⁠—They will not dispute with a <em>man</em> that right which they contest with <em>you</em>.</p>
					<p>Why said he with a <em>man</em>, instead of with him? Yet he looked as if he wanted to be encouraged to say more.</p>
					<p>So, Sir, you would have me employ a lawyer, would you, notwithstanding what I have ever declared as to litigating with my father?</p>
					<p>No, I would not, my dearest creature, snatching my hand, and pressing it with his lips⁠—except you would make <em>me</em> the lawyer.</p>
					<p>Had he said <em>me</em> at first, I should have been above the affectation of mentioning a lawyer.</p>
					<p>I blushed. The man pursued not the subject so ardently, but that it was more easy as well as more natural to avoid it than to fall into it.</p>
					<p>Would to Heaven he might, without offending!⁠—But I <em>so</em> overawed him!⁠—(<em>overawed</em> him!⁠—<em>Your</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref-92" epub:type="noteref">92</a> notion, my dear!)⁠—And so the overawed, bashful man went off from the subject, repeating his proposal, that I would demand my own estate, or empower some man of the law to demand it, if I <q>would not</q> (he put in) empower a happier man to demand it. But it could not be amiss, he thought, to acquaint my two trustees, that I intended to assume it.</p>
					<p>I should know better what to do, I told him, when he was at a distance from me, and <em>known</em> to be so. I suppose, Sir, that if my father propose my return, and engage never to mention Solmes to me, nor any other man, but by <em>my consent</em>, and I agree, upon that condition, to think no more of <em>you</em>, you will acquiesce.</p>
					<p>I was willing to try whether he had the regard to <em>all</em> of my previous declarations, which he pretended to have to <em>some</em> of them.</p>
					<p>He was struck all of a heap.</p>
					<p>What say you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace? You know, all you mean is for my good. Surely I am my own mistress: surely I need not ask your leave to make what terms I please for myself, <em>so long as I break none with you</em>?</p>
					<p>He hemm’d twice or thrice⁠—Why, Madam⁠—why, Madam, I cannot say⁠—then pausing⁠—and rising from his seat with petulance; I see plainly enough, said he, the reason why none of my proposals can be accepted: at <em>last</em> I am to be a sacrifice to your reconciliation with your implacable family.</p>
					<p>It has always been your respectful way, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to treat my family in this free manner. But pray, Sir, when you call <em>others</em> implacable, see that you deserve not the same censure <em>yourself</em>.</p>
					<p>He must needs say, there was no love lost between some of my family and him; but he had not deserved of <em>them</em> what they had of <em>him</em>.</p>
					<p>Yourself being judge, I suppose, Sir?</p>
					<p>All the world, you yourself, Madam, being judge.</p>
					<p>Then, Sir, let me tell you, had you been less upon your defiances, they would not have been irritated so much against you. But nobody ever heard, that avowed despite to the relations of a person was a proper courtship, either to that person, or to her friends.</p>
					<p>Well, Madam, all that I know is, that their malice against me is such, that, if you determine to sacrifice me, you may be reconciled when you please.</p>
					<p>And all I know, Sir, is, that if I do give my father the power of a negative, and he will be contented with <em>that</em>, it will be but my <em>duty</em> to give it him; and if I preserve one to myself, I shall break through no obligation to <em>you</em>.</p>
					<p>Your duty to your capricious <em>brother</em>, not to your <em>father</em>, you mean, Madam.</p>
					<p>If the dispute lay between my brother and me at <em>first</em>, surely, Sir, a father may choose which party he will take.</p>
					<p>He <em>may</em>, Madam⁠—but that exempts him not from blame for all that, if he take the wrong⁠—</p>
					<p>Different people will judge differently, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, of the right and the wrong. <em>You</em> judge as you please. Shall not others as <em>they</em> please? And who has a right to control a father’s judgment in his own family, and in relation to his own child?</p>
					<p>I know, Madam, there is no arguing with you. But, nevertheless, I had hoped to have made myself some little merit with you, so as that I might not have been the <em>preliminary sacrifice</em> to a reconciliation.</p>
					<p>Your hope, Sir, had been better grounded if you had had my consent to my abandoning of my father’s house⁠—</p>
					<p>Always, Madam, and forever, to be reminded of the choice you would have made of that damn’d Solmes⁠—rather than⁠—</p>
					<p>Not so hasty! not so rash, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace! I am convinced that there was no intention to marry me to that Solmes on Wednesday.</p>
					<p>So I am told they now give out, in order to justify themselves at your expense. Everybody living, Madam, is obliged to you for your kind thoughts but I.</p>
					<p>Excuse me, <em>good</em> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace (waving my hand, and bowing), that I am willing to think the best of my father.</p>
					<p>Charming creature! said he, with what a bewitching air is that said!⁠—And with a vehemence in his manner would have snatched my hand. But I withdrew it, being much offended with him.</p>
					<p>I think, Madam, my sufferings for your sake might have entitled me to some favour.</p>
					<p><em>My</em> sufferings, Sir, for your impetuous temper, set against <em>your</em> sufferings for <em>my sake</em>, I humbly conceive, leave me very little your debtor.</p>
					<p>Lord! Madam, (assuming a drawling air) What have you suffered?⁠—Nothing but what you can easily forgive. You have been <em>only</em> made a prisoner in your father’s house, by way of doing credit to your judgment!⁠—You have <em>only</em> had an innocent and faithful servant turned out of your service, because you loved her!⁠—You have <em>only</em> had your sister’s confident servant set over you, with leave to tease and affront you⁠—!</p>
					<p>Very well, Sir!</p>
					<p>You have only had an insolent brother take upon him to treat you like a slave, and as insolent a sister to undermine you in everybody’s favour, on pretence to keep you out of hands, which, if as vile as they vilely report, are not, however, half so vile and cruel as their own.</p>
					<p>Go on, Sir, if you please!</p>
					<p>You have <em>only</em> been persecuted, in order to oblige you to have a sordid fellow, whom you have professed to hate, and whom everybody despises! The license has been <em>only</em> got! The parson has <em>only</em> been had in readiness! The day, a near, a very near day, had been <em>only</em> fixed! And you were <em>only</em> to be searched for your correspondencies, and still closer confined till the day came, in order to deprive you of all means of escaping the snare laid for you!⁠—But all this you can forgive! You can wish you had stood all this; inevitable as the compulsion must have been!⁠—And the man who, at the hazard of his life, had delivered you from all these mortifications, is the only person you <em>cannot</em> forgive!</p>
					<p>Can’t you go on, Sir? You see I have patience to hear you. Can’t you go on, Sir?</p>
					<p>I can, Madam, with my sufferings: which I confess ought not to be mentioned, were I at last to be rewarded in the manner I hoped.</p>
					<p><em>Your</em> sufferings then, if you please, Sir?</p>
					<p>Affrontingly forbidden your father’s house, after encouragement given, without any reasons they knew not before to justify the prohibition: forced upon a rencounter I wished to avoid: the first I ever, so provoked, wished to avoid. And that, because the wretch was your brother!</p>
					<p>Wretch, Sir!⁠—And my brother!⁠—This could be from no man breathing, but from him before me!</p>
					<p>Pardon me, Madam!⁠—But oh! how unworthy to be your brother!⁠—The quarrel grafted upon an old one, when at college; he universally known to be the aggressor; and revived for views equally sordid and injurious both to yourself and me⁠—giving life to him, who would have taken away mine!</p>
					<p>Your <em>generosity</em> <strong>this</strong>, Sir; not your <em>sufferings</em>: a little more of your <em>sufferings</em>, if you please!⁠—I hope you do not repent, that you did not murder my brother!</p>
					<p>My private life hunted into! My morals decried! Some of the accusers not unfaulty!</p>
					<p>That’s an aspersion, Sir!</p>
					<p>Spies set upon my conduct! One hired to bribe my own servant’s fidelity; perhaps to have poisoned me at last, if the honest fellow had not⁠—</p>
					<p><em>Facts</em>, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace!⁠—Do you want facts in the display of your sufferings?⁠—None of your <q>perhaps’s</q>, I beseech you!</p>
					<p>Menaces every day, and defiances, put into everyone’s mouth against me! Forced to creep about in disguises⁠—and to watch <em>all hours</em>⁠—</p>
					<p>And in <q>all weathers</q>, I suppose, Sir⁠—That, I remember, was once your grievance! <q>In all weathers</q>, Sir!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref-93" epub:type="noteref">93</a> and all these hardships arising from yourself, not imposed by me.</p>
					<p>Like a thief, or an eavesdropper, proceeded he: and yet neither by birth nor alliances unworthy of <em>their</em> relation, whatever I may be and am of their admirable daughter: of whom they, every one of them, are at least <em>as</em> unworthy!⁠—These, Madam, I call sufferings: <em>justly</em> call so; if at last I am to be sacrificed to an imperfect reconciliation⁠—<em>imperfect</em>, I say: for, can you expect to live so much as <em>tolerably</em> under the same roof, after all that has passed, with that brother and sister?</p>
					<p>O Sir, Sir! What sufferings have yours been! And all for my sake, I warrant!⁠—I can never reward you for them!⁠—Never think of me more I beseech you⁠—How can you have patience with me?⁠—Nothing has been owing to your own behaviour, I presume: nothing to your defiances for defiances: nothing to your resolution declared more than once, that you <em>would</em> be related to a family, which, nevertheless, you would not stoop to ask a relation of: nothing, in short to courses which everybody blamed you for, you not thinking it worth your while to justify yourself. Had I not thought you used in an ungentlemanly manner, as I have heretofore told you, you had not had my notice by pen and ink.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref-94" epub:type="noteref">94</a> That notice gave you a supposed security, and you generously defied my friends the more for it: and this brought upon me (perhaps not undeservedly) my father’s displeasure; without which, my brother’s private pique, and selfish views, would have wanted a foundation to build upon: so that for all that followed of my treatment, and your redundant <q>only</q>’s, I might thank you principally, as you may yourself for all your <q>sufferings</q>, your <em>mighty</em> sufferings!⁠—And if, voluble Sir, you have founded any merit upon them, be so good as to revoke it: and look upon <em>me</em>, with my forfeited reputation, as the only sufferer⁠—For what⁠—pray hear me out, Sir (for he was going to speak) have you suffered in but your pride? Your reputation <em>could not</em> suffer: <em>that</em> it was beneath you to be solicitous about. And had you not been an unmanageable man, I should not have been driven to the extremity I now every hour, as the hour passes, deplore⁠—with this additional reflection upon myself, that I ought not to have <em>begun</em>, or, having begun, not <em>continued</em> a correspondence with one who thought it not worth his while to clear his own character for my sake, or to submit to my father for <em>his own</em>, in a point wherein every father ought to have an option⁠—</p>
					<p>Darkness, light; light, darkness; by my soul;⁠—just as you please to have it. O charmer of my heart! snatching my hand, and pressing it between both of his, to his lips, in a strange wild way, take me, take me to yourself: mould me as you please: I am wax in your hands; give me your own impression; and seal me forever yours⁠—we were born for each other!⁠—You to make me happy, and save a soul⁠—I am all error, all crime. I see what I ought to have done. But do you think, Madam, I can willingly consent to be sacrificed to a partial reconciliation, in which I shall be so great, so irreparable a sufferer!⁠—Anything but <em>that</em>⁠—include me in your terms: prescribe to me: promise for me as you please⁠—put a halter about my neck, and lead me by it, upon condition of forgiveness on that disgraceful penance, and of a prostration as servile, to your father’s presence (your brother absent), and I will beg his consent at his feet, and bear anything but spurning from him, because he is your father. But to give you up upon <em>cold</em> conditions, d⸺n me (said the shocking wretch) if I either will, or can!</p>
					<p>These were his words, as near as I can remember them; for his behaviour was so strangely wild and fervent, that I was perfectly frighted. I thought he would have devoured my hand. I wished myself a thousand miles distant from him.</p>
					<p>I told him, I by no means approved of his violent temper: he was too boisterous a man for my liking. I saw <em>now</em>, by the conversation that had passed, what was his boasted regard to my <em>injunctions</em>; and should take my measures accordingly, as he should <em>soon</em> find. And, with a half frighted earnestness, I desired him to withdraw, and leave me to myself.</p>
					<p>He obeyed; and that with extreme complaisance in his manner, but with his complexion greatly heightened, and a countenance as greatly dissatisfied.</p>
					<p>But, on recollecting all that passed, I plainly see that he means not, if he can help it, to leave me to the liberty of refusing him; which I had nevertheless preserved a <em>right</em> to do; but looks upon me as <em>his</em>, by a strange sort of obligation, for having run away with me <em>against my will</em>.</p>
					<p>Yet you see he but touches upon the edges of matrimony neither. And that at a time, generally, when he has either excited one’s passions or apprehensions; so that one cannot at once descend. But surely this cannot be his design.⁠—And yet such seemed to be his behaviour to my sister,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref-95" epub:type="noteref">95</a> when he provoked her to refuse him, and so tamely submitted, as he did, to her refusal. But he dare not⁠—What can one say of so various a man?⁠—I am now again out of conceit with him. I wish I were fairly out of his power.</p>
					<p>He has sent up three times to beg admittance; in the two last with unusual earnestness. But I have sent him word, I will finish what I am about.</p>
					<p>What to do about going from this place, I cannot tell. I could stay here with all my heart, as I have said to him: the gentlewoman and her daughters are desirous that I will: although not very convenient for them, I believe, neither: but I see he will not leave me, while I do⁠—so I <em>must</em> remove somewhere.</p>
					<p>I have long been sick of myself: and now I am more and more so. But let me not lose your good opinion. If I do, that loss will complete the misfortunes of</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your</p>
						<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
