<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 42: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-42" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</span>
				</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>An angry dialogue, a scolding-bout rather, has passed between my sister and me. Did you think I could scold, my dear?</p>
					<p>She was sent up to me, upon my refusal to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes⁠—let loose upon me, I think!⁠—No intention on their parts to conciliate! It seems evident that I am given up to my brother and her, by general consent.</p>
					<p>I will do justice to everything she said against me, which carried any force with it. As I ask for your approbation or disapprobation of my conduct, upon the facts I lay before you, I should think it the sign of a very bad cause, if I endeavoured to mislead my judge.</p>
					<p>She began with representing to me the danger I had been in, had my father come up, as he would have done had he not been hindered⁠—by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <em>Solmes</em>, among the rest. She reflected upon my Norton, as if she encouraged me in my perverseness. She ridiculed me for my supposed esteem for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace⁠—was surprised that the <em>witty</em>, the <em>prudent</em>, nay, the <em>dutiful</em> and <em>pi⁠⸺⁠ous</em> (so she sneeringly pronounced the word) Clarissa Harlowe, should be so strangely fond of a profligate man, that her parents were forced to lock her up, in order to hinder her from running into his arms. “Let me ask you, my dear, said she, how you now keep your account of the disposition of your time? <em>How many hours</em> in the <em>twenty-four</em> do you devote to your needle? How many to your prayers? How many to letter-writing? And how many to love?⁠—I doubt, I doubt, my little dear, was her arch expression, the latter article is like Aaron’s rod, and swallows up the rest!⁠—Tell me; is it not so?”</p>
					<p>To these I answered, That it was a double mortification to me to owe my safety from the effects of my father’s indignation to a man I could never thank for anything. I vindicated the good <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton with a warmth that was due to her merit. With equal warmth I resented her reflections upon me on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s account. As to the disposition of my time in the twenty-four hours, I told her it would better have become her to pity a sister in distress, than to exult over her⁠—especially, when I could too justly attribute to the disposition of some of her wakeful hours no small part of that distress.</p>
					<p>She raved extremely at this last hint: but reminded me of the gentle treatment of all my friends, my mother’s in particular, before it came to this. She said, that I had discovered a spirit they never had expected: that, if they had <em>thought</em> me such a championess, they would hardly have ventured to engage with me: but that now, the short and the long of it was, that the matter had gone too far to be given up: that it was become a contention between <em>duty</em> and <em>willfulness</em>; whether a parent’s authority were to yield to a daughter’s obstinacy, or the contrary: that I must therefore bend or break, that was all, child.</p>
					<p>I told her, that I wished the subject were of such a nature, that I could return her pleasantry with equal lightness of heart: but that, if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes had such merit in everybody’s eyes, in <em>hers</em>, particularly, why might he not be a <em>brother</em> to me, rather than a <em>husband</em>?</p>
					<p>O child, says she, methinks you are as pleasant to the full as I am: I begin to have some hopes of you now. But do you think I will rob my sister of her humble servant? Had he first addressed himself to me, proceeded she, something might have been said: but to take my younger sister’s refusal! No, no, child; it is not come to that neither! Besides, that would be to leave the door open in your heart for you know who, child; and we would fain bar him out, if possible. In short (and then she changed both her tone and her looks) had I been as forward as somebody, to throw myself into the arms of one of the greatest profligates in England, who had endeavoured to support his claim to me through the blood of my brother, then might all my family join together to save me from such a wretch, and to marry me as fast as they could, to some worthy man, who might <em>opportunely</em> offer himself. And now, Clary, all’s out, and make the most of it.</p>
					<p>Did not this deserve a severe return? Do, say it did, to justify my reply.⁠—Alas! for my poor sister! said I⁠—The man was not always so great a profligate. How true is the observation, <em>That unrequited love turns to deepest hate!</em></p>
					<p>I thought she would beat me. But I proceeded⁠—I have heard often of my brother’s danger, and my brother’s murderer. When so little ceremony is made with me, why should I not speak out?⁠—Did he not seek to kill the <em>other</em>, if he could have done it? Would my brother have given Lovelace <em>his</em> life, had it been in his power?⁠—The <em>aggressor</em> should not complain.⁠—And, as to <em>opportune</em> offers, would to Heaven someone had offered <em>opportunely</em> to somebody! It is not my fault, Bella, the <em>opportune</em> gentleman don’t come!</p>
					<p>Could <em>you</em>, my dear, have shown more spirit? I expected to feel the weight of her hand. She did come up to me, with it held up: then, speechless with passion, ran half way down the stairs, and came up again.</p>
					<p>When she could speak⁠—God give me patience with you!</p>
					<p>Amen, said I: but you see, Bella, how ill you bear the retort you provoke. Will you forgive me; and let me find a sister in <em>you</em>, as I am sorry, if you had reason to think me unsisterly in what I have said?</p>
					<p>Then did she pour upon me, with greater violence; considering my gentleness as a triumph of temper over her. She was resolved, she said, to let everybody know how I took the wicked Lovelace’s part against my brother.</p>
					<p>I wished, I told her, I could make the plea for <em>myself</em>, which she might for <em>herself</em>; to wit, that my anger was more inexcusable than my judgment. But I presumed she had some other view in coming to me, than she had hitherto acquainted me with. Let me, said I, but know (after all that has passed) if you have anything to propose that I <em>can</em> comply with; anything that can make my <em>only</em> sister once more my friend?</p>
					<p>I had before, upon hearing her ridiculing me on my supposed character of <em>meekness</em>, said, that, although I wished to be thought <em>meek</em>, I would not be <em>abject</em>; although <em>humble</em> not <em>mean</em>: and here, in a sneering way, she cautioned me on that head.</p>
					<p>I replied, that her pleasantry was much more agreeable than her anger. But I wished she would let me know the end of a visit that had hitherto (between us) been so unsisterly.</p>
					<p>She desired to be informed, in the name of <em>everybody</em>, was her word, what I was determined upon? And whether to comply or not?⁠—One word for all: My friends were not to have patience with so perverse a creature forever.</p>
					<p>This then I told her I would do: Absolutely break with the man they were all so determined against: upon condition, however, that neither <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes, nor any other, were urged upon me with the force of a command.</p>
					<p>And what was this, more than I had offered before? What, but ringing my changes upon the same bells, and neither receding nor advancing one tittle?</p>
					<p>If I knew what other proposals I could make, I told her, that would be acceptable to them all, and free me from the address of a man so disagreeable to me, I <em>would</em> make them. I had indeed before offered, never to marry without my father’s consent⁠—</p>
					<p>She interrupted me, That was because I depended upon my whining tricks to bring my father and mother to what I pleased.</p>
					<p>A <em>poor</em> dependence! I said:⁠—<em>She</em> knew those who would make that dependence vain⁠—</p>
					<p>And I <em>should</em> have brought them to my own beck, very probably, and my uncle Harlowe too, as also my aunt Hervey, had I not been forbidden from their sight, and thereby hindered from playing my pug’s tricks before them.</p>
					<p>At least, Bella, said I, you have hinted to me <em>to whom</em> I am obliged, that my father and mother, and everybody else, treat me thus harshly. But surely you make them all very weak. Indifferent persons, judging of us two from what <em>you</em> say, would either think <em>me</em> a very artful creature, or <em>you</em> a very spiteful one⁠—</p>
					<p>You are <em>indeed</em> a very artful one, for that matter, interrupted she in a passion: one of the artfullest I ever knew! And then followed an accusation so low! so unsisterly!⁠—That I half-bewitched people by my insinuating address: that nobody could be valued or respected, but must stand like ciphers wherever I came. How often, said she, have I and my brother been talking upon a subject, and had everybody’s attention, till <em>you</em> came in, with your bewitching <em>meek</em> pride, and <em>humble</em> significance? And then have we either been stopped by references to Miss Clary’s opinion, forsooth; or been forced to stop ourselves, or must have talked on unattended to by everybody.</p>
					<p>She paused. Dear Bella, proceed!</p>
					<p>She indeed seemed only gathering breath.</p>
					<p>And so I <em>will</em>, said she⁠—Did you not bewitch my grandfather? Could anything be pleasing to him, that you did not say or do? How did he use to hang, till he slabbered again, poor doting old man! on your silver tongue! Yet what did you say, that we could not have said? What did you do, that we did not endeavour to do?⁠—And what was all this for? Why, truly, his last will showed what effect your <em>smooth</em> obligingness had upon him!⁠—To leave the <em>acquired part</em> of his estate from the next heirs, his own sons, to a grandchild; to his <em>youngest</em> grandchild! A <em>daughter</em> too!⁠—To leave the family-pictures from his sons to you, because you could <em>tiddle</em> about them, and, though you now neglect their examples, could wipe and clean them with your dainty hands! The family-plate too, in such quantities, of two or three generations standing, must not be changed, because his <em>precious child</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a> humouring his old <em>fal-lal</em> taste, admired it, to make it all her own.</p>
					<p>This was too low to move me: O my poor sister! said I: not to be able, or at least willing, to distinguish between art and nature! If I <em>did</em> oblige, I was happy in it: I looked for no further reward: my mind is above art, from the dirty motives you mention. I wish with all my heart my grandfather had not thus distinguished me; he saw my brother likely to be amply provided for <em>out</em> of the family, as well as <em>in</em> it: he desired that <em>you</em> might have the greater share of my father’s favour for it; and no doubt but you <em>both</em> will. You know, Bella, that the estate my grandfather bequeathed <em>me</em> was not half the real estate he left.</p>
					<p>What’s all that to an estate in possession, and left you with such distinctions, as gave you a reputation of greater value than the estate itself?</p>
					<p>Hence my misfortune, Bella, in your envy, I doubt!⁠—But have I not given up that possession in the best manner I could⁠—</p>
					<p>Yes, interrupting me, she hated me for that <em>best manner</em>. Specious little witch! she called me: your <em>best manner</em>, so full of art and design, had never been seen through, if you, with your blandishing ways, have not been put out of sight, and reduced to positive declarations!⁠—Hindered from playing your little declarations!⁠—Hindered from playing your little whining tricks! curling, like a serpent about your mamma; and making her cry to deny you anything your little obstinate heart was set upon⁠—!</p>
					<p>Obstinate heart, Bella!</p>
					<p>Yes, obstinate heart! For did you ever give up anything? Had you not the art to make them think all was right you asked, though my brother and I were frequently refused favours of no greater import!</p>
					<p>I know not, Bella, that I ever asked anything unfit to be granted. I seldom asked favours for <em>myself</em>, but for <em>others</em>.</p>
					<p>I was a reflecting creature for this.</p>
					<p>All you speak of, Bella, was a long time ago. I cannot go so far back into our childish follies. Little did I think of how <em>long standing</em> your <em>late-shown</em> antipathy is.</p>
					<p>I was a reflector again! Such a <em>saucy meekness</em>; such a <em>best manner</em>; and such venom in words!⁠—O Clary! Clary! Thou wert always a <em>two-faced</em> girl!</p>
					<p>Nobody thought I had two faces, when I gave up all into my father’s management; taking from his bounty, as before, all my little pocket-money, without a shilling addition to my stipend, or desiring it⁠—</p>
					<p>Yes, cunning creature!⁠—And that was another of your <em>fetches</em>!⁠—For did it not engage my fond father (as no doubt you thought it would) to tell you, that since you had done so grateful and dutiful a thing, he would keep entire, for your use, all the produce of the estate left you, and be but your steward in it; and that you should be entitled to the same allowances as before? Another of your <em>hook-in’s</em>, Clary!⁠—So that all your extravagancies have been supported gratis.</p>
					<p>My extravagancies, Bella!⁠—But did my father ever give me anything he did not give you?</p>
					<p>Yes, indeed; I got more by that means, than I should have had the conscience to ask. But I have still the greater part to show! But <em>you</em>! What have <em>you</em> to show?⁠—I dare say, not fifty pieces in the world!</p>
					<p>Indeed I have not!</p>
					<p>I believe you!⁠—Your mamma Norton, I suppose⁠—But mum for that⁠—!</p>
					<p>Unworthy Bella! The good woman, although low in circumstance, is great in mind! Much greater than those who would impute meanness to a soul incapable of it.</p>
					<p>What then have you done with the sums given you from infancy to squander?⁠—Let me ask you (affecting archness), Has, has, has Lovelace, has your rake, put it out at interest for you?</p>
					<p>O that my sister would not make me blush for her! It <em>is</em>, however, out at interest!⁠—And I hope it will bring me interest upon interest!⁠—Better than to lie useless in my cabinet.</p>
					<p>She understood me, she said. Were I a man, she should suppose I was aiming to carry the county⁠—Popularity! A crowd to follow me with their blessings as I went to and from church, and nobody else to be regarded, were agreeable things. Housetop-proclamations! I <em>hid not my light under a bushel</em>, she would say that for me. But was it not a little hard upon me, to be kept from blazing on a Sunday?⁠—And to be hindered from my charitable ostentations?</p>
					<p>This, indeed, Bella, is cruel in you, who have so largely contributed to my confinement.⁠—But go on. You’ll be out of breath by-and-by. I cannot wish to be <em>able</em> to return this usage.⁠—<em>Poor</em> Bella! And I believe I smiled a little too contemptuously for a sister to a sister.</p>
					<p>None of your saucy contempts (rising in her voice): None of your <em>poor Bella</em>’s, with that air of superiority in a younger sister!</p>
					<p>Well then, <em>rich</em> Bella! courtesying⁠—that will please you better⁠—and it is due likewise to the hoards you boast of.</p>
					<p>Look ye, Clary, holding up her hand, if you are not a little more <em>abject</em> in your <em>meekness</em>, a little more <em>mean</em> in your <em>humility</em>, and treat me with the respect due to an elder sister⁠—you shall find⁠—</p>
					<p>Not that you will treat me worse than you <em>have done</em>, Bella!⁠—That cannot be; unless you were to let fall your uplifted hand upon me⁠—and that would less become you to <em>do</em>, than me to <em>bear</em>.</p>
					<p>Good, meek creature:⁠—But you were upon your overtures just now!⁠—I shall surprise everybody by tarrying so long. They will think some good may be done with you⁠—and supper will be ready.</p>
					<p>A tear would stray down my cheek⁠—How happy have I been, said I, sighing, in the suppertime conversations, with all my dear friends in my eye round their hospitable board.</p>
					<p>I met only with insult for this⁠—Bella has not a <em>feeling</em> heart. The highest joy in this life she is not capable of: but then she saves herself many griefs, by her impenetrableness⁠—yet, for ten times the pain that such a sensibility is attended with, would I not part with the pleasure it brings with it.</p>
					<p>She asked me, upon my turning from her, if she should not say anything <em>below</em> of my <em>compliances</em>?</p>
					<p>You may say, that I will do everything they would have me do, if they will free me from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes’s address.</p>
					<p>This is all you desire at present, <em>creeper on!</em> <em>insinuator!</em> (What words she has!) But will not t’other man flame out, and roar most horribly, upon the snatching from his paws a prey he thought himself sure of?</p>
					<p>I must let you talk in your own way, or we shall never come to a point. I shall not matter in his <em>roaring</em>, as you call it. I will promise him, that, if I ever marry any other man, it shall not be till he is married. And if he be not satisfied with such a condescension, I shall think he <em>ought</em>: and I will give any assurances, that I will neither correspond with him, nor see him. Surely this will do.</p>
					<p>But I suppose then you will have no objection to see and converse, on a civil footing, with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes⁠—as your father’s friend, or so?</p>
					<p>No! I must be permitted to retire to my apartment whenever he comes. I would no more converse with the one, than correspond with the other. That would be to make <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace guilty of some rashness, on a belief, that I broke with him, to have <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes.</p>
					<p>And so, that wicked wretch is to be allowed such a control over you, that you are not to be civil to your father’s friends, at his own house, for fear of incensing <em>him</em>!⁠—When this comes to be represented, be so good as to tell me, what is it you expect from it!</p>
					<p><em>Everything</em>, I said, or <em>nothing</em>, as she was pleased to represent it.⁠—Be so good as to give it your interest, Bella, and say, further, “That I will by any means I can, in the law or otherwise, make over to my father, to my uncles, or even to my brother, all I am entitled to by my grandfather’s will, as a security for the performance of my promises. And as I shall have no reason to expect any favour from my father, if I break them, I shall not be worth anybody’s having. And further still, unkindly as my brother has used me, I will go down to Scotland privately, as his housekeeper (I now see I may be spared here) if he will promise to treat me no worse than he would do an hired one.⁠—Or I will go to Florence, to my cousin Morden, if his stay in Italy will admit of it. In <em>either case</em>, it may be given out, that I am gone to the <em>other</em>; or to the world’s end. I care not whither it is said I am gone, or do go.”</p>
					<p>Let me ask you, child, if you will give your pretty proposal in writing?</p>
					<p>Yes, with all my heart. And I stepped to my closet, and wrote to the purpose I have mentioned; and moreover, the following lines to my brother.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">My Dear Brother,</p>
						</header>
						<p>I hope I have made such proposals to my sister as will be accepted. I am sure they will, if you please to give them your sanction. Let me beg of you, for God’s sake, that you will. I think myself very unhappy in having incurred your displeasure. No sister can love a brother better than I love you. Pray do not put the worst but the best constructions upon my proposals, when you have them reported to you. Indeed I mean the best. I have no subterfuges, no arts, no intentions, but to keep to the letter of them. You shall yourself draw up everything into writing, as strong as you can, and I will sign it: and what the <em>law</em> will not do to enforce it, my <em>resolution</em> and my <em>will</em> shall: so that I shall be worth nobody’s address, that has not my papa’s consent: nor shall any person, nor any consideration, induce me to revoke it. You can do more than anybody to reconcile my parents and uncles to me. Let me owe this desirable favour to your brotherly interposition, and you will forever oblige</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your afflicted Sister,</p>
							<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<hr/>
					<p>And how do you think Bella employed herself while I was writing?⁠—Why, playing gently upon my harpsichord; and <em>humming</em> to it, to show her unconcernedness.</p>
					<p>When I approached her with what I had written, she arose with an air of levity⁠—Why, love, you have not written already!⁠—You have, I protest!⁠—O what a ready penwoman!⁠—And may I read it?</p>
					<p>If you please. And let me beseech you, my dear Bella, to back these proposals with your good offices: and (folding my uplifted hands; tears, I believe, standing in my eyes) I will love you as never sister loved another.</p>
					<p>Thou art a strange creature, said she; there is no withstanding thee.</p>
					<p>She took the proposals and letter; and having read them, burst into an affected laugh: How wise ones may be taken in!⁠—Then you did not know, that I was jesting with you all this time!⁠—And so you would have me carry down this pretty piece of nonsense?</p>
					<p>Don’t let me be surprised at your seeming unsisterliness, Bella. I hope it is <em>but</em> seeming. There can be <em>no</em> wit in such jesting as this.</p>
					<p>The folly of the creature!⁠—How natural is it for people, when they set their hearts upon anything, to think everybody must see with their eyes!⁠—Pray, dear child, what becomes of your father’s authority <em>here</em>?⁠—Who <em>stoops here</em>, the <em>parent</em>, or the <em>child</em>?⁠—How does <em>this</em> square with engagements actually agreed upon between your father and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes? What security, that your rake will not follow you to the <em>world’s end</em>?⁠—Nevertheless, that you may not think that I stand in the way of a reconciliation on such fine terms as these, I will be your messenger this once, and hear what my papa will say to it; although beforehand I can tell you, these proposals will not answer the principal end.</p>
					<p>So down she went. But, it seems, my aunt Hervey and my uncle Harlowe were not gone away: and as they have all engaged to act in concert, messengers were dispatched to my uncle and aunt to desire them to be there to breakfast in the morning.</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Monday Night, Eleven o’clock.</p>
					<p>I am afraid I shall not be thought worthy⁠—</p>
					<p>Just as I began to fear I should not be thought worthy of an answer, Betty rapped at my door, and said, if I were not in bed, she had a letter for me. I had but just done writing the above dialogue, and stepped to the door with the pen in my hand⁠—Always writing, Miss! said the bold wench: it is admirable how you can get away what you write⁠—but the fairies, they say, are always at hand to help lovers.⁠—She retired in so much haste, that, had I been disposed, I could not take the notice of this insolence which it deserved.</p>
					<p>I enclose my brother’s letter. He was resolved to let me see, that I should have nothing to expect from his kindness. But surely he will not be permitted to carry every point. The assembling of my friends tomorrow is a good sign: and I will hope something from that, and from proposals so reasonable. And now I will try if any repose will fall to my lot for the remainder of this night.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p class="addressee">To Miss Clary Harlowe (Enclosed in the Preceding.)</p>
						<p>Your proposals will be considered by your father and mother, and all your friends, tomorrow morning. What trouble does your shameful forwardness give us all! I wonder you have the courage to write to me, upon whom you are so continually emptying your <em>whole female quiver</em>. I have no patience with you, for reflecting upon me as the aggressor in a quarrel which owed its beginning to my consideration for <em>you</em>.</p>
						<p>You have made such confessions in a villain’s favour, as ought to cause all your relations to renounce you forever. For my part, I will not believe any woman in the world, who promises against her <em>avowed</em> inclination. To put it out of your <em>power</em> to ruin yourself is the only way left to prevent your ruin. I did not intend to write; but your <em>too-kind</em> sister has prevailed upon me. As to your going to Scotland, that day of grace is over.⁠—Nor would I advise, that you should go to <em>grandfather-up</em> your cousin Morden. Besides, that worthy gentleman might be involved in some fatal dispute, upon your account; and then be called the <em>aggressor</em>.</p>
						<p>A fine situation you have brought yourself to, to propose to hide yourself from your rake, and to have falsehoods told, to conceal you!⁠—Your confinement, at this rate, is the happiest thing that could befal you. Your bravo’s behaviour at church, looking out for you, is a sufficient indication of his power over you, had you <em>not</em> so shamelessly acknowledged it.</p>
						<p>One word for all⁠—Your parents and uncles may do as they will: but if, for the honour of the family, I cannot carry this point, I will retire to Scotland, and never see the face of anyone of it more.</p>
						<footer>
							<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">James Harlowe.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<hr/>
					<p>There’s a brother!⁠—There’s flaming duty to a father, and mother, and uncles!⁠—But he sees himself valued, and made of consequence; and he gives himself airs accordingly!⁠—Nevertheless, as I said above, I will hope better things from those who have not the interest my brother has to keep open these unhappy differences.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
