<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter XXVI: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-26" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p class="explanatory">[In continuation]</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>But is it not a confounded thing that I cannot fasten an obligation upon this proud beauty? I have two motives in endeavouring to prevail upon her to accept of money and raiment from me: one; the real pleasure I should have in the accommodating of the haughty maid; and to think there was something near her, and upon her, that I could call <em>mine</em>: the other, in order to abate her severity and humble her a little.</p>
					<p>Nothing more effectually brings down a proud spirit, than a sense of lying under pecuniary obligations. This has always made me solicitous to avoid laying myself under any such: yet, sometimes, formerly, have I been put to it, and cursed the tardy resolution of the quarterly periods. And yet I ever made shift to avoid anticipation: <q>I never would eat the calf in the cow’s belly</q>, as Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr>’s phrase is: for what is that, but to hold our lands upon <em>tenant-courtesy</em>, the vilest of all tenures? To be denied a fox-chase, for breaking down a fence upon my own grounds? To be clamoured at for repairs <em>studied</em> for, rather than really <em>wanted</em>? To be prated to by a bumpkin with his hat on, and his arms folded, as if he defied your expectations of that sort; his foot firmly fixed, as if upon his own ground, and you forced to take his arch leers, and stupid gibes; he intimating, by the whole of his conduct, that he had had it in his power to oblige you, and, if you behave civilly, may oblige you again? I, who think I have a right to break every man’s head I pass by, if I like not his looks, to bear this!⁠—No more could I do it, then I could borrow of an insolent uncle, or inquisitive aunt, who would thence think themselves entitled to have an account of all my life and actions laid before them for their review and censure.</p>
					<p>My charmer, I see, has a pride like my own: but she has no <em>distinction</em> in her pride: nor knows the pretty fool that there is nothing nobler, nothing more delightful, than for loves to be conferring and receiving obligations from each other. In this very farmyard, to give thee a familiar instance, I have more than once seen this remark illustrated. A strutting rascal of a cock have I beheld chuck, chuck, chuck, chucking his mistress to him, when he has found a single barleycorn, taking it up with his bill, and letting it drop five or six times, still repeating his chucking invitation: and when two or three of his feathered ladies strive who shall be the first for it (<em>O Jack! a cock is a grand signor of a bird!</em>) he directs the bill of the foremost to it; and when she has got the dirty pearl, he struts over her with an erected crest, cling round her with dropped wings, sweeping the dust in humble courtship: while the obliged she, half-shy, half-willing, by her cowering tail, prepared wings, yet seemingly affrighted eyes, and contracted neck, lets one see that she knows the barleycorn was not all he called her for.</p>
					<p class="abstract">[When he comes to that part of his narrative, where he mentions of the proposing of the Lady’s maid <em>Hannah</em>, or one of the young Sorlings, to attend her, thus he writes:]</p>
					<p>Now, Belford, canst thou imagine what I meant by proposing Hannah, or one of the girls here, for her attendant? I’ll give thee a month to guess.</p>
					<p>Thou wilt not pretend to guess, thou say’st.</p>
					<p>Well, then I’ll tell thee.</p>
					<p>Believing she would certainly propose to have that favourite wench about her, as soon as she was a little settled, I had caused the girl to be inquired after, with an intent to make interest, some how or other, that a month’s warning should be insisted on by her master or mistress, or by some other means, which I had not determined upon, to prevent her coming to her. But fortune fights for me. The wench is luckily ill; a violent rheumatic disorder, which has obliged her to leave her place, confines her to her chamber. Poor Hannah! How I pity the girl! These things are very hard upon industrious servants!⁠—I intend to make the poor wench a small present on the occasion⁠—I know it will oblige my charmer.</p>
					<p>And so, Jack, <em>pretending not to know anything of the matter</em>, I pressed her to send for Hannah. She knew I had always a regard for this servant, because of her honest love to her lady: but now I have greater regard for her than ever. Calamity, though a poor servant’s calamity, will rather increase than diminish good will, with a truly generous master or mistress.</p>
					<p>As to one of the young Sorling’s attendance, there was nothing at all in proposing that; for if either of them had been chosen by <em>her</em>, and permitted by the <em>mother</em> (<em>two chances in that</em>!) it would have been only till I had fixed upon another. And, if afterwards they had been loth to part, I could easily have given my beloved to a jealousy, which would have done the business; or to the girl, who would have quitted her <em>country dairy</em>, such a relish for a <em>London one</em>, and as would have made it very convenient for her to fall in love with Will; or perhaps I could have done still better for her with Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr>’s chaplain, who is very desirous of standing well with his lord’s presumptive heir.</p>
					<p>A blessing on thy honest heart, Lovelace! thou’lt say; for thou art for providing for everybody!</p>
					<p class="abstract">[He gives an account of the serious part of their conversation, with no great variation from the Lady’s account of it: and when he comes to that part of it, where he bids her remember, that reformation cannot be a sudden thing, he asks his friend:]</p>
					<p>Is not this fair play? Is it not dealing ingenuously? Then the observation, I will be bold to say, is founded in <em>truth</em> and <em>nature</em>. But there was a little touch of <em>policy</em> in it besides; that the lady, if I should fly out again, should not think me too gross an hypocrite: for, as I plainly told her, I was afraid, that my fits of reformation were <em>but</em> fits and sallies; but I hoped her example would fix them into habits. But it is so discouraging a thing to have my monitress so very good!⁠—I protest I know not how to look up at her! Now, as I am thinking, if I could pull her down a little nearer to my own level; that is to say, could prevail upon her to do something that would argue <em>imperfection</em>, something <em>to repent of</em>; we should jog on much more equally, and be better able to comprehend one another: and so the comfort would be mutual, and the remorse not all on one side.</p>
					<p class="abstract">[He acknowledges that he was greatly affected and pleased with the Lady’s serious arguments at the time: but even then was apprehensive that his temper would not hold. Thus he writes:]</p>
					<p>This lady says serious things in so agreeable a manner (and then her voice is all harmony when she touches a subject she is pleased with) that I could have listened to her for half a day together. But yet I am afraid, if she <em>falls</em>, as they call it, she will lose a good deal of that <em>pathos</em>, of that noble self-confidence, which gives a good person, as I now see, a visible superiority over one <em>not</em> so good.</p>
					<p>But, after all, Belford, I would fain know why people call such free-livers as you and me <em>hypocrites</em>.⁠—That’s a word I hate; and should take it very ill to be called by it. For myself, I have as good motions, and, perhaps, have them as frequently as anybody: all the business is, they don’t hold; or, to speak more in character, <em>I don’t take the care some do to conceal my lapses</em>.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
