<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter XVII: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-17" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sunday Afternoon, Six o’clock, (<time datetime="06-18">June 18</time>.)</p>
					</header>
					<p>I went out early this morning, and returned not till just now; when I was informed that my beloved, in my absence, had taken it into her head to attempt to get away.</p>
					<p>She tripped down, with a parcel tied up in a handkerchief, her hood on; and was actually in the entry, when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sinclair saw her.</p>
					<p>Pray, Madam, whipping between her and the street-door, be pleased to let me know where you are going?</p>
					<p>Who has a right to control me? was the word.</p>
					<p>I have, Madam, by order of your spouse: and, kemboing her arms, as she owned, I desire you will be pleased to walk up again.</p>
					<p>She would have spoken; but could not: and, bursting into tears, turned back, and went up to her chamber: and Dorcas was taken to task for suffering her to be in the passage before she was seen.</p>
					<p>This shows, as we hoped last night, that she is recovering her charming intellects.</p>
					<p>Dorcas says, she was visible to her but once before the whole day; and then she seemed very solemn and sedate.</p>
					<p>I will endeavour to see her. It must be in her own chamber, I suppose; for she will hardly meet me in the dining-room. What advantage will the confidence of our sex give me over the modesty of hers, if she be recovered!⁠—<em>I</em>, the most confident of men: <em>she</em>, the most delicate of women. Sweet soul! methinks I have her before me: her face averted: speech lost in sighs⁠—abashed⁠—conscious⁠—what a triumphant aspect will this give me, when I gaze on her downcast countenance!</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>This moment Dorcas tells me she believes she is coming to find me out. She asked her after me: and Dorcas left her, drying her red-swoln eyes at her glass; (no design of moving me by tears!) sighing too sensibly for my courage. But to what purpose have I gone thus far, if I pursue not my principal end? Niceness must be a little abated. She knows the worst. That she cannot fly me; that she must see me; and that I can look her into a sweet confusion; are circumstances greatly in my favour. What can she do but rave and exclaim? I am used to raving and exclaiming⁠—but, if recovered, I shall see how she behaves upon this our first sensible interview after what she has suffered.</p>
					<p>Here she comes.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
