<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 27: Miss Howe, to Mis Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-27" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Miss Howe, to Mis Clarissa Harlowe</span>
				</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Saturday, <time datetime="1738-04-15">April 15</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>Though pretty much pressed in time, and oppressed by my mother’s watchfulness, I will write a few lines upon the new light that has broken in upon your gentleman; and send it by a particular hand.</p>
					<p>I know not what to think of him upon it. He talks well; but judge him by Rowe’s lines, he is certainly a <em>dissembler</em>, odious as the sin of hypocrisy, and, as he says, that other of ingratitude, are to him.</p>
					<p>And, pray, my dear, let me ask, could he have triumphed, as it is said he has done, over so many of our sex, had he not been egregiously guilty of <em>both</em> sins?</p>
					<p>His ingenuousness is the thing that staggers me: yet is he cunning enough to know, that whoever accuses him first, blunts the edge of an adversary’s accusation.</p>
					<p>He is certainly a man of sense: there is more hope of such a one than a fool: and there must be a <em>beginning</em> to a reformation. These I will allow in his favour.</p>
					<p>But this, that follows, I think, is the only way to judge of his specious confessions and self-accusations⁠—Does he confess anything that you knew not before, or that you are not likely to find out from others?⁠—If nothing else, what does he confess to his own disadvantage? You have heard of his duels: you have heard of his seductions.⁠—All the world has. He <em>owns</em>, therefore, what it would be to no purpose to <em>conceal</em>; and his ingenuousness is a salvo⁠—“Why, this, Madam, is no more than <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace <em>himself</em> acknowledges.”</p>
					<p>Well, but what is now to be done?⁠—You must make the best of your situation: and as you say, so he has proposed to you of Windsor, and his canon’s house. His readiness to leave you, and go himself in quest of a lodging, likewise looks well. And I think there is nothing can be so properly done, as (whether you get to a canon’s house or not) that the canon should join you together in wedlock as soon as possible.</p>
					<p>I much approve, however, of all your cautions, of all your vigilance, and of everything you have done, but of your <em>meeting him</em>. Yet, in my disapprobation of that, I judge by that event only: for who would have divined it would have been concluded as it did? But he is the devil by his own account: and had he run away with the wretched Solmes, and your more wretched brother, and himself been transported for life, he should have had my free consent for all three.</p>
					<p>What use does he make of that Joseph Leman!⁠—His ingenuousness, I must more than once say, confounds me; but if, my dear, you can forgive your brother for the part he put that fellow upon acting, I don’t know whether you ought to be angry at Lovelace. Yet I have wished fifty times, since Lovelace got you away, that you were rid of him, whether it were by a burning fever, by hanging, by drowning, or by a broken neck; provided it were before he laid you under a necessity to go into mourning for him.</p>
					<p>I repeat my hitherto rejected offer. May I send it safely by your old man? I have reasons for not sending it by Hickman’s servant; unless I had a bank note. Inquiring for such may cause distrust. My mother is so busy, so inquisitive⁠—I don’t love suspicious tempers.</p>
					<p>And here she is continually in and out⁠—I must break off.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman begs his most respectful compliments to you, with offer of his services. I told him I would oblige him, because minds in trouble take kindly anybody’s civilities: but that he was not to imagine that he particularly obliged me by this; since I should think the man or woman either blind or stupid who admired not a person of your exalted merit for your own sake, and wished not to serve you without view to other reward than the honour of serving you.</p>
					<p><q>To be sure, that was his principal motive</q>, with great daintiness he said it: but with a kiss of his hand, and a bow to my feet, he hoped, that a fine lady’s being <em>my friend</em> did not lessen the merit of the reverence he really had for her.</p>
					<p>Believe me ever, what you, my dear, shall ever find me,</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your faithful and affectionate,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Anna Howe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
