<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter IV: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>This fair inexorable is actually gone to church with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Moore and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bevis; but Will closely attends her motions; and I am in the way to receive any occasional intelligence from him.</p>
					<p>She did not <em>choose</em>, (a mighty word with the sex! as if they were <em>always</em> to have their own wills!) that I should wait upon her. I did not much press it, that she might not apprehend that I thought I had reason to doubt her voluntary return.</p>
					<p>I once had it in my head to have found the widow Bevis other employment. And I believe she would have been as well pleased with my company as to go to church; for she seemed irresolute when I told her that two out of a family were enough to go to church for one day. But having her things on, (as the women call everything,) and her aunt Moore expecting her company, she thought it best to go⁠—<q>lest it should look oddly, you know</q>, whispered she, to one who was above regarding how it looked.</p>
					<p>So here am I in my dining-room; and have nothing to do but to write till they return.</p>
					<p>And what will be my subject thinkest thou? Why, the old beaten one to be sure; self-debate⁠—through temporary remorse: for the blow being not struck, her guardian angel is redoubling his efforts to save her.</p>
					<p>If it be not <em>that</em>, (and yet what power should <em>her</em> guardian angel have over <em>me</em>?) I don’t know what it is that gives a check to my revenge, whenever I meditate treason against so sovereign a virtue. Conscience is dead and gone, as I told thee; so it cannot be that. A young conscience growing up, like the phoenix, from the ashes of the old one, it cannot be, surely. But if it were, it would be hard, if I could not overlay a young conscience.</p>
					<p>Well, then, it must be <strong>love</strong>, I fancy. <strong>love</strong> itself, inspiring love of an object so adorable⁠—some little attention possibly paid likewise to thy whining arguments in her favour.</p>
					<p>Let <strong>love</strong> then be allowed to be the moving principle; and the rather, as <strong>love</strong> naturally makes the lover loth to disoblige the object of its flame; and knowing, that to an offence of the <em>meditated</em> kind will be a mortal offence to her, cannot bear that I should think of giving it.</p>
					<p>Let <strong>love</strong> and me talk together a little on this subject⁠—be it a <em>young conscience</em>, or <em>love</em>, or <em>thyself</em>, Jack, thou seest that I am for giving every whiffler audience. But this must be the last debate on this subject; for is not her fate in a manner at its crisis? And must not my next step be an irretrievable one, tend it which way it will?</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>And now the debate is over.</p>
					<p>A thousand charming things, (for <strong>love</strong> is gentler than <strong>conscience</strong>,) has this little urchin suggested in her favour. He pretended to know both our hearts: and he would have it, that though my love was a prodigious strong and potent love; and though it has the merit of many months, faithful service to plead, and has had infinite difficulties to struggle with; yet that it is not <strong>the right sort of love</strong>.</p>
					<p><em>Right sort of love!</em>⁠—A puppy!⁠—But, with due regard to your deityship, said I, what merits has she with <strong>you</strong>, that <em>you</em> should be of her party? Is <em>hers</em>, I pray you, a <em>right sort of love</em>? Is it <em>love</em> at all? She don’t <em>pretend</em> that it is. She owns not your sovereignty. What a d⁠⸺⁠l moves <em>you</em>, to plead thus earnestly for a rebel, who despises your power?</p>
					<p>And then he came with his <em>If’s</em> and <em>And’s</em>⁠—and it would <em>have been</em>, and <em>still</em>, as he believed, would be, love, and a love of the exalted kind, if I would encourage it by the <em>right sort of love</em> he talked of: and, in justification of his opinion, pleaded her own confessions, as well those of yesterday, as of this morning: and even went so far back as to my ipecacuanha illness.</p>
					<p>I never talked so familiarly with his godship before: thou mayest think, therefore, that his dialect sounded oddly in my ears. And then he told me, how often I had thrown cold water upon the most charming flame that ever warmed a lady’s bosom, while but young and rising.</p>
					<p>I required a definition of this <em>right sort</em> of love, he tried at it: but made a sorry hand of it: nor could I, for the soul of me, be convinced, that what he meant to extol was <strong>love</strong>.</p>
					<p>Upon the whole, we had a noble controversy upon this subject, in which he insisted upon the <em>unprecedented merit</em> of the lady. Nevertheless I got the better of him; for he was struck absolutely dumb, when (waving her present perverseness, which yet was a sufficient answer to all his pleas) I asserted, and offered to prove it, by a thousand instances impromptu, that love was not governed by <em>merit</em>, nor could be under the dominion of <em>prudence</em>, or any other <em>reasoning power</em>: and if the lady were capable of love, it was of such a sort <em>as he had nothing to do with</em>, and which never before reigned in a female heart.</p>
					<p>I asked him, what he thought of her flight from me, at a time when I was more than half overcome by the <em>right sort of love</em> he talked of?⁠—And then I showed him the letter she wrote, and left behind her for me, with an intention, no doubt, absolutely to break my heart, or to provoke me to hang, drown, or shoot myself; to say nothing of a multitude of declarations from her, defying his power, and imputing all that looked like love in her behaviour to me, to the persecution and rejection of her friends; which made her think of me but as a last resort.</p>
					<p><strong>Love</strong> then gave her up. The letter, he said, deserved neither pardon nor excuse. He did not think he had been pleading for such a <em>declared</em> rebel. And as to the rest, he should be a betrayer of the rights of his own sovereignty, if what I had alleged were true, and he were still to plead for her.</p>
					<p>I swore to the truth of all. And <em>truly</em> I swore: which perhaps I do not always do.</p>
					<p>And now what thinkest thou must become of the lady, whom <strong>love</strong> itself gives up, and <strong>conscience</strong> cannot plead for?</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
