<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 51: Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> to John Belford, Esq. M. Hall,</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-51" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr> M. Hall,</span>
				</h3>
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday, <time datetime="1738-09-29"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 29</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>Dear Sir,</p>
				<p>My kinsman Lovelace is now setting out for London; proposing to see you, and then to go to Dover, and so embark. God send him well out of the kingdom!</p>
				<p>On Monday he will be with you, I believe. Pray let me be favoured with an account of all your conversations; for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mowbray and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tourville are to be there too; and whether you think he is grown quite his own man again.</p>
				<p>What I mostly write for is, to wish you to keep Colonel Morden and him asunder; and so I give you notice of his going to town. I should be very loth there should be any mischief between them, as you gave me notice that the Colonel threatened my nephew. But my kinsman would not bear that; so nobody let him know that he did. But I hope there is no fear; for the Colonel does not, as I hear, threaten now. For his own sake, I am glad of that; for there is not such a man in the world as my kinsman is said to be, at all the weapons⁠—as well he was not; he would not be so daring.</p>
				<p>We shall all here miss the wild fellow. To be sure, there is no man better company when he pleases.</p>
				<p>Pray, do you never travel thirty or forty miles? I should be glad to see you here at M. Hall. It will be charity when my kinsman is gone; for we suppose you will be his chief correspondent; although he has promised to write to my nieces often. But he is very apt to forget his promises; to us his relations particularly. God preserve us all; Amen! prays</p>
				<p>Your very humble servant, M.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
