<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 6: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Harlowe-Place, <time datetime="1738-01-20"><abbr>Jan.</abbr> 20</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>I will now resume my narrative of proceedings here.⁠—My brother being in a good way, although you may be sure that his resentments are rather heightened than abated by the galling disgrace he has received, my friends (my father and uncles, however, if not my brother and sister) begin to think that I have been treated unkindly. My mother been so good as to tell me this since I sent away my last.</p>
					<p>Nevertheless I believe they all think that I receive letters from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. But Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> being inclined rather to support than to blame his nephew, they seem to be so much afraid of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, that they do not put it to me whether I do or not; conniving on the contrary, as it should seem, at the only method left to allay the vehemence of a spirit which they have so much provoked: For he still insists upon satisfaction from my uncles; and this possibly (for he wants not art) as the best way to be introduced again with some advantage into our family. And indeed my aunt Hervey has put it to my mother, whether it were not best to prevail upon my brother to take a turn to his Yorkshire estate (which he was intending to do before) and to stay there till all is blown over.</p>
					<p>But this is very far from being his intention: For he has already began to hint again, that he shall never be easy or satisfied till I am married; and, finding neither <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Symmes nor <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mullins will be accepted, has proposed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wyerley once more, on the score of his great passion for me. This I have again rejected; and but yesterday he mentioned one who has applied to him by letter, making high offers. This is <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes; <em>Rich</em> Solmes you know they call him. But this application has not met with the attention of one single soul.</p>
					<p>If none of his schemes of getting me married take effect, he has thoughts, I am told, of proposing to me to go to Scotland, that as the compliment is, I may put his house there in such order as our own is in. But this my mother intends to oppose for her own sake; because having relieved her, as she is pleased to say, of the household cares (for which my sister, you know, has no turn) they must again devolve upon her if I go. And if <em>she</em> did not oppose it, <em>I</em> should; for, believe me, I have no mind to be his housekeeper; and I am sure, were I to go with him, I should be treated rather as a servant than a sister:⁠—perhaps, not the better because I <em>am</em> his sister. And if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace should follow me, things might be worse than they are now.</p>
					<p>But I have besought my mother, who is apprehensive of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s visits, and for fear of whom my uncles never stir out without arms and armed servants (my brother also being near well enough to go abroad), to procure me permission to be your guest for a fortnight, or so.⁠—Will your mother, think you, my dear, give me leave?</p>
					<p>I dare not ask to go to my <em>dairy-house</em>, as my good grandfather would call it: for I am now afraid of being thought to have a wish to enjoy that independence to which his will has entitled me: and as matter are situated, such a wish would be imputed to my regard to the man to whom they have now so great an antipathy. And indeed could I be as easy and happy here as I used to be, I would defy that man and all his sex; and never repent that I have given the power of my fortune into my father’s hands.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>Just now, my mother has rejoiced me with the news that my requested permission is granted. Everyone thinks it best that I should go to you, except my brother. But he was told, that he must not expect to rule in everything. I am to be sent for into the great parlour, where are my two uncles and my aunt Hervey, and to be acquainted with this concession in form.</p>
					<p>You know, my dear, that there is a good deal of solemnity among us. But never was there a family more united in its different branches than ours. Our uncles consider us as their own children, and declare that it is for our sakes that they live single. So that they are advised with upon every article relating to us, or that may affect us. It is therefore the less wonder, at a time when they understand that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace is determined to pay us an <em>amicable</em> visit, as he calls it, (but which I am sure cannot end amicably,) that they should both be consulted upon the permission I had desired to attend you.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>I will acquaint you with what passed at the general leave given me to be your guest. And yet I know that you will not love my brother the better for my communication. But I am angry with him myself, and cannot help it. And besides, it is proper to let you know the terms I go upon, and their motives for permitting me to go.</p>
					<p>Clary, said my mother, as soon as I entered the great parlour, your request to go to Miss Howe’s for a few days has been taken into consideration, and granted⁠—</p>
					<p>Much against my liking, I assure you, said my brother, rudely interrupting her.</p>
					<p>Son James! said my father, and knit his brows.</p>
					<p>He was not daunted. His arm was in a sling. He often has the mean art to look upon <em>that</em>, when anything is hinted that may be supposed to lead toward the least favour to or reconciliation with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace.⁠—Let the <em>girl</em> then (I am often the <em>girl</em> with him) be prohibited seeing that vile libertine.</p>
					<p>Nobody spoke.</p>
					<p>Do you hear, sister Clary? taking their silence for approbation of what <em>he</em> had dictated; you are not to receive visits from Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr>’s nephew.</p>
					<p>Everyone still remained silent.</p>
					<p>Do you so understand the license you have, Miss? interrogated he.</p>
					<p>I would be glad, Sir, said I, to understand that you are my <em>brother</em>;⁠—and that <em>you</em> would understand that you are <em>only</em> my brother.</p>
					<p>O the fond, fond heart! with a sneer of insult, lifting up his hands.</p>
					<p>Sir, said I, to my father, to your justice I appeal: If I have deserved reflection, let me be not spared. But if I am to be answerable for the rashness⁠—</p>
					<p>No more!⁠—No more of either side, said my father. You are not to receive the visits of that Lovelace, though.⁠—Nor are you, son James, to reflect upon your sister. She is a worthy child.</p>
					<p>Sir, I have done, replied he:⁠—and yet I have <em>her</em> honour at heart, as much as the honour of the rest of the family.</p>
					<p>And <em>hence</em>, Sir, retorted I, your unbrotherly reflections upon me?</p>
					<p>Well, but you observe, Miss, said he, that it is not <em>I</em>, but your <em>father</em>, that tells you, that you are not to receive the visits of that Lovelace.</p>
					<p>Cousin Harlowe, said my aunt Hervey, allow me to say, that my cousin Clary’s prudence may be confided in.</p>
					<p>I am <em>convinced</em> it may, joined my mother.</p>
					<p>But, aunt, but, madam (put in my sister) there is no hurt, I presume, in letting my sister know the condition she goes to Miss Howe upon; since, if he gets a knack of visiting her there⁠—</p>
					<p>You may be sure, interrupted my uncle Harlowe, he will endeavour to see her there.</p>
					<p>So would such an impudent man <em>here</em>, said my uncle Antony: and ’tis better done <em>there</em> than <em>here</em>.</p>
					<p>Better <em>nowhere</em>, said my father.⁠—I command you (turning to me) on pain of displeasure, that you see him not at all.</p>
					<p>I will not, Sir, in any way of encouragement, I do assure you: not at all, if I can properly avoid it.</p>
					<p>You know with what indifference, said my mother, she has hitherto seen him.⁠—Her prudence may be trusted to, as my sister Hervey says.</p>
					<p>With what <em>appa⁠—rent</em> indifference, drawled my brother.</p>
					<p>Son James! said my father sternly.</p>
					<p>I have done, Sir, said he. But again, in a provoking manner, he reminded me of the prohibition.</p>
					<p>Thus ended the conference.</p>
					<p>Will you engage, my dear, that the hated man shall not come near your house?⁠—But what an inconsistence is this, when they consent to my going, thinking his visits <em>here</em> no otherwise to be avoided!⁠—But if he does come, I charge you never to leave us alone together.</p>
					<p>As I have no reason to doubt a welcome from your good mother, I will put everything in order here, and be with you in two or three days.</p>
					<footer>
						<p>Meantime, I am</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your most affectionate and obliged,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
