<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 70: Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-6-70" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p class="explanatory">In Continuation</p>
					</header>
					<p>[The lady next gives an account,</p>
					<p>Of her recovery from her delirium and sleepy disorder:</p>
					<p>Of her attempt to get away in his absence:</p>
					<p>Of the conversations that followed, at his return, between them:</p>
					<p>Of the guilty figure he made:</p>
					<p>Of her resolution not to have him:</p>
					<p>Of her several efforts to escape:</p>
					<p>Of her treaty with Dorcas to assist her in it:</p>
					<p>Of Dorcas’s dropping the promissory note, undoubtedly, as she says, on purpose to betray her:</p>
					<p>Of her triumph over all the creatures of the house, assembled to terrify her; and perhaps to commit fresh outrages upon her:</p>
					<p>Of his setting out for M. Hall:</p>
					<p>Of his repeated letters to induce her to meet him at the altar, on her uncle’s anniversary:</p>
					<p>Of her determined silence to them all:</p>
					<p>Of her second escape, effected, <em>as she says</em>, contrary to her own expectation: the attempt being at first but the intended prelude to a more promising one, which she had formed in her mind:</p>
					<p>And of other particulars; which being to be found in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s letters preceding, and the letter of his friend Belford, are omitted. She then proceeds:]</p>
					<p>The very hour that I found myself in a place of safety, I took pen to write to you. When I began, I designed only to write six or eight lines, to inquire after your health: for, having heard nothing from you, I feared <em>indeed</em>, that you <em>had been</em>, and <em>still were</em>, too ill to write. But no sooner did my pen begin to blot the paper, but my sad heart hurried it into length. The apprehensions I had lain under, that I should not be able to get away; the fatigue I had in effecting my escape: the difficulty of procuring a lodging for myself; having disliked the people of two houses, and those of a third disliking me; for you must think I made a frighted appearance⁠—these, together with the recollection of what I had suffered from him, and my farther apprehensions of my insecurity, and my desolate circumstances, had so disordered me, that I remember I rambled strangely in that letter.</p>
					<p>In short, I thought it, on re-perusal, a half-distracted one: but I then despaired, (were I to begin again,) of writing better: so I let it go: and can have no excuse for directing it as I did, if the cause of the incoherence in it will not furnish me with a very pitiable one.</p>
					<p>The letter I received from your mother was a dreadful blow to me. But nevertheless it had the good effect upon me (labouring, as I did just then, under a violent fit of vapourish despondency, and almost yielding to it) which profuse bleeding and blisterings have in paralytic or apoplectical strokes; reviving my attention, and restoring me to spirits to combat the evils I was surrounded by⁠—sluicing off, and diverting into a new channel, (if I may be allowed another metaphor,) the overcharging woes which threatened once more to overwhelm my intellects.</p>
					<p>But yet I most sincerely lamented, (and still lament,) in your mother’s words, <em>That I cannot be unhappy by myself</em>: and was grieved, not only for the trouble I had given you before; but for the new one I had brought upon you by my inattention.</p>
					<p class="abstract">(She then gives the substance of the letters she wrote to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton, to Lady Betty Lawrance, and to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hodges; as also of their answers; whereby she detected all <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s impostures. She proceeds as follows:)</p>
					<p>I cannot, however, forbear to wonder how the vile Tomlinson could come at the knowledge of several of the things he told me of, and which contributed to give me confidence in him.*</p>
					<p class="footnote">* The attentive reader need not be referred back for what the Lady nevertheless could not account for, as she knew not that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace had come at Miss Howe’s letters; particularly that in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span> which he comments upon in Letter XLIV. of the same volume.</p>
					<p>I doubt not that the stories of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fretchville and her house would be found as vile as any of the rest, were I to inquire; and had I not enough, and too much, already against the perjured man.</p>
					<p>How have I been led on!⁠—What will be the end of such a false and perjured creature! Heaven not less profaned and defied by him than myself deceived and abused! This, however, against myself I must say, That if what I have suffered be the natural consequence of my first error, I never can forgive <em>myself</em>, although you are so partial in my favour, as to say, that I was not censurable for what passed before my first escape.</p>
					<p>And now, honoured Madam, and my dearest Miss Howe, who are to sit in judgment upon my case, permit me to lay down my pen with one request, which, with the greatest earnestness, I make to you both: and that is, That you will neither of you open your lips in relation to the potions and the violences I have hinted at.⁠—Not that I am solicitous, that my disgrace should be hidden from the world, or that it should not be generally known, that the man has proved a villain to me: for this, it seems, everybody but myself expected from his character. But suppose, as his actions by me are really of a <em>capital nature</em>, it were insisted upon that I should appear to prosecute him and his accomplices in a court of justice, how do you think I could bear that?</p>
					<p>But since my character, <em>before</em> the capital enormity, was lost in the eye of the world; and that from the very hour I left my father’s house; and since all my own hopes of worldly happiness are entirely over; let me slide quietly into my grave; and let it be not remembered, except by one friendly tear, and no more, dropped from your gentle eye, mine own dear Anna Howe, on the happy day that shall shut up all my sorrows, that there was such a creature as</p>
					<p>Clarissa Harlowe Saturday, July 8.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
