<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 47: Mr. Belford, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-47" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Miss Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, <time datetime="1738-09-28"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 28</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>Madam,</p>
					<p>I do myself the honour to send you by this, according to my promise,* copies of the posthumous letters written by your exalted friend.</p>
					<p class="footnote">* See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span> of this volume.</p>
					<p>These will be accompanied with other letters, particularly a copy of one from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, begun to be written on the 14th, and continued down to the 18th.* You will see by it, Madam, the dreadful anguish that his spirits labour with, and his deep remorse.</p>
					<p class="footnote">* See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</span> ibid.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace sent for this letter back. I complied; but I first took a copy of it. As I have not told him that I have done so, you will be pleased to forbear communicating of it to anybody but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman. That gentleman’s perusal of it will be the same as if nobody but yourself saw it.</p>
					<p>One of the letters of Colonel Morden, which I enclose, you will observe, Madam, is only a copy.* The true reason for which, as I will ingenuously acknowledge, is, some free, but respectful animadversions which the Colonel has made upon your declining to carry into execution your part of your dear friend’s last requests. I have therefore, in respect to that worthy gentleman, (having a caution from <em>him</em> on that head,) omitted those parts.</p>
					<p class="footnote">* The preceding Letter.</p>
					<p>Will you allow me, Madam, however, to tell you, that I myself could not have believed that my inimitable testatrix’s own Miss Howe would have been the most backward in performing such a part of her dear friend’s last will, as is entirely in her own power to perform⁠—especially, when that performance would make <em>one of the most deserving men in England happy</em>; and whom, I presume, she <em>proposes</em> to honour with her hand.</p>
					<p>Excuse me, Madam, I have a most sincere veneration for you; and would not disoblige you for the world.</p>
					<p>I will not presume to make remarks on the letters I send you; nor upon the informations I have to give you of the dreadful end of two unhappy wretches who were the greatest criminals in the affair of your adorable friend. These are the infamous <em>Sinclair</em>, and a person whom you have read of, no doubt, in the letters of the charming innocent, by the name of Captain <em>Tomlinson</em>.</p>
					<p>The wretched woman died in the extremest tortures and despondency: the man from wounds got in defending himself in carrying on a contraband trade; both accusing themselves, in their last hours, for the parts they had acted against the most excellent of women, as of the crime that gave them the deepest remorse.</p>
					<p>Give me leave to say, Madam, that if your <em>compassion</em> be not excited for the poor man who suffers so greatly from his own anguish of mind, as you will observe by his letter he does; and for the unhappy family, whose remorse, you will see by Colonel Morden’s, is so deep; your <em>terror</em> must. And yet I should not wonder, if the just sense of the irreparable loss you have sustained hardens a heart against pity, which, on a less extraordinary occasion, would want its <em>principal grace</em>, if it were not compassionate.</p>
					<p>I am, Madam, with the greatest respect and gratitude, Your most obliged and faithful humble servant, J. Belford.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
