<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 10: To Miss Arabella Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">To Miss Arabella Harlowe</span>
				</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p class="letter-reference">Enclosed to Miss Howe in the Preceding</p>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline"><abbr>St.</abbr> Alban’s, <time datetime="1738-04-11"><abbr>Apr.</abbr> 11</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>My Dear Sister,</p>
					<p>I have, I confess, been guilty of an action which carries with it a rash and undutiful appearance. And I should have thought it an inexcusable one, had I been used with less severity than I have been of late; and had I not had too great reason to apprehend, that I was to be made a sacrifice to a man I could not bear to think of. But what is done, is done⁠—perhaps I could wish it had not; and that I had trusted to the relenting of my dear and honourable parents.⁠—Yet this from no other motives but those of duty to them.⁠—To whom I am ready to return (if I may not be permitted to retire to The Grove) on conditions which I before offered to comply with.</p>
					<p>Nor shall I be in any sort of dependence upon the person by whose means I have taken this truly-reluctant step, inconsistent with any reasonable engagement I shall enter into, if I am not further precipitated. Let me not have it to say, now at this important crisis! that I have a sister, but not a friend in that sister. My reputation, dearer to me than life, (whatever you may imagine from the step I have taken,) is suffering. A little lenity will, even yet, in a great measure, restore it, and make that pass for a temporary misunderstanding only, which otherwise will be a stain as durable as life, upon a creature who has already been treated with great unkindness, to use no harsher a word.</p>
					<p>For your own sake therefore, for my brother’s sake, by whom (I must say) I have been thus precipitated, and for all the family’s sake, aggravate not my fault, if, on recollecting everything, you think it one; nor by widening the unhappy difference, expose a sister forever⁠—prays</p>
					<p>Your affectionate <abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
					<p>I shall take it for a very great favour to have my clothes directly sent me, together with fifty guineas, which you will find in my escritoire (of which I enclose the key); as also of the divinity and miscellany classes of my little library; and, if it be thought fit, my jewels⁠—directed for me, to be left till called for, at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Osgood’s, near Soho-square.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
