<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 4: Miss Cl. Harlowe, to Antony Harlowe, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss <abbr>Cl.</abbr> Harlowe, to Antony Harlowe, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sunday, <time datetime="08-13"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 13</time></p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Honoured Sir,</p>
					</header>
					<p>I am very sorry for my pert letter to my uncle Harlowe. Yet I did not intend it to be pert. People <em>new</em> to misfortune may be too easily moved to impatience.</p>
					<p>The fall of a regular person, no doubt, is dreadful and inexcusable. It is like the sin of apostacy. Would to Heaven, however, that I had had the circumstances of mine inquired into!</p>
					<p>If, Sir, I make myself worse than I am in my health, and better than I am in my penitence, it is fit I should be punished for my double dissimulation: and <em>you</em> have the pleasure of being one of my punishers. My sincerity in both respects will, however, be best justified by the event. To <em>that</em> I refer.⁠—May Heaven give you always as much comfort in reflecting upon the reprobation I have met with, as you seem to have pleasure in mortifying a young creature, <em>extremely</em> mortified; and that from a <em>right</em> sense, as she presumes to hope, of her own fault!</p>
					<p>What you <em>heard of me</em> I cannot tell. When the nearest and dearest relations give up an unhappy wretch, it is not to be wondered at that those who are <em>not</em> related to her are ready to take up and propagate slanders against her. Yet I think I may defy calumny itself, and (excepting the fatal, though involuntary step of <time datetime="04-10"><em>April</em> 10</time>) wrap myself in my own innocence, and be easy. I thank you, Sir, nevertheless, for your <em>caution</em>, mean it what it will.</p>
					<p>As to the question required of me to answer, and which is allowed to be too shocking either for a mother to put to a daughter, or a sister to a sister; and which, however, <em>you</em> say I <em>must</em> answer;⁠—O Sir!⁠—And <em>must</em> I answer?⁠—This then be my answer:⁠—“A <em>little</em> time, a much <em>less</em> time than is imagined, will afford a more satisfactory answer to my whole family, and even to my <em>brother</em> and <em>sister</em>, than I can give in words.”</p>
					<p>Nevertheless, be pleased to let it be remembered, that I did not petition for a restoration to favour. I could not hope for that. Nor yet to be put in possession of any part of my own estate. Nor even for means of necessary subsistence from the produce of that estate⁠—but only for a blessing; for a <em>last</em> blessing!</p>
					<p>And this I will farther add, because it is <em>true</em>, that I have no wilful crime to charge against myself: no free living at bed and at board, as you phrase it!</p>
					<p>Why, why, Sir, were not <em>other</em> inquiries made of me, as well as this shocking one?⁠—inquiries that modesty <em>would</em> have permitted a mother or sister to make; and which, if I may be excused to say so, would have been still <em>less</em> improper, and <em>more</em> charitable, to have been made by <em>uncles</em>, (were the mother <em>forbidden</em>, or the sister <em>not inclined</em>, to make them,) than those they have made.</p>
					<p>Although my humble application has brought upon me so much severe reproach, I repent not that I have written to my mother, (although I cannot but wish that I had not written to my sister;) because I have satisfied a dutiful consciousness by it, however unanswered by the wished-for success. Nevertheless, I cannot help saying, that mine is indeed a hard fate, that I cannot beg pardon for my capital errors without doing it in such terms as shall be an aggravation of the offence.</p>
					<p>But I had best leave off, lest, as my full mind, I find, is rising to my pen, I have other pardons to beg as I multiply lines, where none at all will be given.</p>
					<p>God Almighty bless, preserve, and comfort my dear sorrowing and grievously offended father and mother!⁠—and continue in honour, favour, and merit, my happy sister!⁠—May God forgive my brother, and protect him from the violence of his own temper, as well as from the destroyer of his sister’s honour!⁠—And may you, my dear uncle, and your no less now than ever dear brother, my second papa, as he used to bid me call him, be blessed and happy in them, and in each other!⁠—And, in order to this, may you all speedily banish from your remembrance, forever,</p>
					<footer>
						<p>The unhappy</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe!</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
