<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter X: Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sunday Night, <time datetime="1738-07-16">July 16</time></p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">My Dearest Friend,</p>
					</header>
					<p>Why should you permit a mind, so much devoted to your service, to labour under such an impatience as you must know it <em>would</em> labour under, for want of an answer to a letter of such consequence to <em>you</em>, and therefore to <em>me</em>, as was mine of Thursday night?⁠—Rogers told me, on Thursday, you were <em>so</em> ill; your letter sent by him was <em>so</em> melancholy!⁠—Yet you must be ill indeed, if you could not write something to such a letter; were it but a line, to say you would write as soon as you could. Sure you have received it. The master of your nearest post-office will pawn his reputation that it went safe: I gave him particular charge of it.</p>
					<p>God send me good news of your health, of your ability to write; and then I will chide you⁠—indeed I will⁠—as I never yet did chide you.</p>
					<p>I suppose your excuse will be, that the subject required consideration⁠—Lord! my dear, so it might; but you have so right a mind, and the matter in question is so obvious, that you could not want half an hour to determine.⁠—Then you intended, probably, to wait Collins’s call for your letter as on tomorrow!⁠—Suppose something were to happen, as it did on Friday, that he should not be able to go to town tomorrow?⁠—How, child, could you serve me so!⁠—I know not how to leave off scolding you!</p>
					<p>Dear, honest Collins, make haste: he will: he will. He sets out, and travels all night: for I have told him, that the dearest friend I have in the world has it in her own choice to be happy, and to make me so; and that the letter he will bring from her will assure it to me.</p>
					<p>I have ordered him to go directly (without stopping at the Saracen’s-head-inn) to you at your lodgings. Matters are now in so good a way, that he safely may.</p>
					<p>Your expected letter is ready written I hope: if it can be not, he will call for it at your hour.</p>
					<p>You can’t be so happy as you deserve to be: but I doubt not that you will be as happy as you <em>can</em>; that is, that you will choose to put yourself instantly into Lady Betty’s protection. If you would not have the wretch for <em>your own</em> sake; have him you must, for <em>mine</em>, for your <em>family’s</em>, for your <em>honour’s</em>, sake!⁠—Dear, honest Collins, make haste! make haste! and relieve the impatient heart of my beloved’s</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Ever faithful, ever affectionate,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Anna Howe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
