<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 2: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, <time datetime="1738-07-13">July 13</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>I am extremely concerned, my dear Miss Howe, for being primarily the occasion of the apprehensions you have of this wicked man’s vindictive attempts. What a wide-spreading error is mine!⁠—</p>
					<p>If I find that he has set foot on any machination against you, or against <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman, I do assure you I will consent to prosecute him, although I were sure I could not survive my first appearance at the bar he should be arraigned at.</p>
					<p>I own the justice of your mother’s arguments on that subject; but must say, that I think there are circumstances in my particular case, which will excuse me, although on a slighter occasion than that you are apprehensive of I should decline to appear against him. I have said, that I may one day enter more particularly into this argument.</p>
					<p>Your messenger has now <em>indeed</em> seen me. I talked with him on the cheat put upon him at Hampstead: and am sorry to have reason to say, that had not the poor young man been very <em>simple</em>, and very <em>self-sufficient</em>, he had not been so grossly deluded. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bevis has the same plea to make for herself. A good-natured, thoughtless woman; not used to converse with so vile and so specious a deceiver as him, who made his advantage of both these shallow creatures.</p>
					<p>I think I cannot be more private than where I am. I hope I am safe. All the risque I run, is in going out, and returning from morning-prayers; which I have two or three times ventured to do; once at Lincoln’s-inn chapel, at eleven; once at <abbr>St.</abbr> Dunstan’s, Fleet-street, at seven in the morning,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-285" id="noteref-285" epub:type="noteref">285</a> in a chair both times; and twice, at six in the morning, at the neighbouring church in Covent-garden. The wicked wretches I have escaped from, will not, I hope, come to church to look for me; especially at so early prayers; and I have fixed upon the privatest pew in the latter <em>church</em> to hide myself in; and perhaps I may lay out a little matter in an ordinary gown, by way of disguise; my face half hid by my mob.⁠—I am very careless, my dear, of my appearance now. Neat and clean takes up the whole of my attention.</p>
					<p>The man’s name at whose house I belong, is Smith⁠—a glove <em>maker</em>, as well as <em>seller</em>. His wife is the shopkeeper. A dealer also in stockings, ribbands, snuff, and perfumes. A matron-like woman, plain-hearted, and prudent. The husband an honest, industrious man. And they live in good understanding with each other: a proof with me that their hearts are right; for where a married couple live together upon ill terms, it is a sign, I think, that each knows something amiss of the other, either with regard to temper or morals, which if the world knew as well as themselves, it would perhaps as little like them as such people like each other. Happy the marriage, where neither man nor wife has any wilful or premeditated evil in their general conduct to reproach the other with!⁠—for even persons who have bad hearts will have a veneration for those who have good ones.</p>
					<p>Two neat rooms, with plain, but clean furniture, on the first floor, are mine; one they call the dining-room.</p>
					<p>There is, up another pair of stairs, a very worthy widow-lodger, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lovick by name; who, although of low fortunes, is much respected, as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith assures me, by people of condition of her acquaintance, for her piety, prudence, and understanding. With her I propose to be well acquainted.</p>
					<p>I thank you, my dear, for your kind, your seasonable advice and consolation. I hope I shall have more grace given me than to despond, in the <em>religious</em> sense of the word: especially as I can apply to myself the comfort you give me, that neither my will, nor my inconsiderateness, has contributed to my calamity. But, nevertheless, the irreconcilableness of my relations, whom I love with an unabated reverence; my apprehensions of fresh violences, (this wicked man, I doubt, will not let me rest); my being destitute of protection; my youth, my sex, my unacquaintedness with the world, subjecting me to insults; my reflections on the scandal I have given, added to the sense of the indignities I have received from a man, of whom I deserved not ill; all together will undoubtedly bring on the effect that cannot be undesirable to me.⁠—The situation; and, as I presume to imagine, from principles which I hope will, in due time, and by due reflection, set me <em>above the sense of all worldly disappointments</em>.</p>
					<p>At present, my head is much disordered. I have not indeed enjoyed it with any degree of clearness, since the violence done to that, and to my heart too, by the wicked arts of the abandoned creatures I was cast among.</p>
					<p>I must have more conflicts. At times I find myself not subdued enough to my condition. I will welcome those conflicts as they come, as <em>probationary</em> ones.⁠—But yet my father’s malediction⁠—the temporary part so strangely and so literally completed!⁠—I cannot, however, think, when my mind is <em>strongest</em>⁠—But what is the story of Isaac, and Jacob, and Esau, and of Rebekah’s cheating the latter of the blessing designed for him, (in favour of Jacob,) given us for in the 27th chapter of Genesis? My father used, I remember, to enforce the doctrine deducible from it, on his children, by many arguments. At least, therefore, <em>he</em> must believe there is great weight in the curse he has announced; and shall I not be solicitous to get it revoked, that he may not hereafter be grieved, for my sake, that he did <em>not</em> revoke it?</p>
					<p>All I will at present add, are my thanks to your mother for her indulgence to us; due compliments to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman; and my request, that you will believe me to be, to my last hour, and beyond it, if possible, my beloved friend, and my <em>dearer</em> self (for what is now myself!)</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your obliged and affectionate</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
