<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 33: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-33" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</span>
				</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p class="aside">(In this letter, the Lady acquaints Miss Howe with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brand’s report; with her sister’s proposals either that she will go abroad, or prosecute <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. She complains of the severe letters of her uncle Antony and her sister; but in milder terms than they deserved.)</p>
					<p>She sends her <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lewen’s letter, and the copy of her answer to it.</p>
					<p class="aside">She tells her of the difficulties she had been under to avoid seeing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. She gives her the contents of the letter she wrote to him to divert him from his proposed visit: she is afraid, she says, that it is a step that is not strictly right, if allegory or metaphor be not allowable to one in her circumstances.</p>
					<p class="aside">She informs her of her cousin Morden’s arrival and readiness to take her part with her relations; of his designed interview with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace; and tells her what her apprehensions are upon it.</p>
					<p class="aside">She gives her the purport of the conversation between her aunt Hervey and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton. And then add:]</p>
					<p>But were they ever so favourably inclined to me now, what can they do for me? I wish, and that for their sakes more than for my own, that they would yet relent⁠—but I am very ill⁠—I must drop my pen⁠—a sudden faintness overspreads my heart⁠—excuse my crooked writing!⁠—Adieu, my dear!⁠—Adieu!</p>
					<p>Three o’clock, Friday.</p>
					<p>Once more I resume my pen. I thought I had taken my last farewell to you. I never was so very oddly affected: something that seemed totally to overwhelm my faculties⁠—I don’t know how to describe it⁠—I believe I do amiss in writing so much, and taking too much upon me: but an active mind, though clouded by bodily illness, cannot be idle.</p>
					<p>I’ll see if the air, and a discontinued attention, will help me. But, if it will not, don’t be concerned for me, my dear. I shall be happy. Nay, I am more so already than of late I thought I could ever be in this life. —Yet how this body clings!⁠—How it encumbers!</p>
					<p>Seven o’clock.</p>
					<p>I could not send this letter away with so melancholy an ending, as you would have thought it. So I deferred closing it, till I saw how I should be on my return from my airing: and now I must say I am quite another thing: so alert! that I could proceed with as much spirit as I began, and add more preachment to your lively subject, if I had not written more than enough upon it already.</p>
					<p>I wish you would let me give you and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman joy. Do, my dear. I should take some to myself, if you would.</p>
					<p>My respectful compliments to all your friends, as well to those I have the honour to know, as to those I do not know.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>I have just now been surprised with a letter from one whom I long ago gave up all thoughts of hearing from. From <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wyerley. I will enclose it. You’ll be surprised at it as much as I was. This seems to be a man whom I might have reclaimed. But I could not love him. Yet I hope I never treated him with arrogance. Indeed, my dear, if I am not too partial to myself, I think I refused him with more gentleness, than you retain somebody else. And this recollection gives me less pain than I should have had in the other case, on receiving this instance of a generosity that affects me. I will also enclose the rough draught of my answer, as soon as I have transcribed it.</p>
					<p>If I begin another sheet, I shall write to the end of it: wherefore I will only add my prayers for your honour and prosperity, and for a long, long, happy life; and that, when it comes to be wound up, you may be as calm and as easy at quitting it as I hope in God I shall be. I am, and will be, to the latest moment,</p>
					<p>Your truly affectionate and obliged servant, <abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
