<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter XLIII: Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-43" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sat. Afternoon</p>
					</header>
					<p>By your last date of ten o’clock in your letter of this day, you could not long have deposited it before Robin took it. He rode hard, and brought it to me just as I had risen from table.</p>
					<p>You may justly blame me for sending my messenger empty-handed, your situation considered; and yet that very situation (so critical!) is partly the reason for it: for indeed I knew not what to write, fit to send you.</p>
					<p>I have been inquiring privately, how to procure you a conveyance from Harlowe-place, and yet not appear in it; knowing, that to oblige in the <em>fact</em>, and to disoblige in the manner, is but obliging by halves: my mother being moreover very suspicious, and very uneasy; made more so by daily visits from your uncle Antony; who tells her, that everything is now upon the point of being determined; and hopes, that her daughter will not so interfere, as to discourage your compliance with their wills. This I came at by a way that I cannot take notice of, or <em>both</em> should hear of it in a manner <em>neither</em> would like: and, <em>without</em> that, my mother and I have had almost hourly bickerings.</p>
					<p>I found more difficulty than I expected (as the time was confined, and secrecy required, and as you so earnestly forbid me to accompany you in your enterprise) in procuring you a vehicle. Had you not obliged me to keep measures with my mother, I could have managed it with ease. I could even have taken our own chariot, on one pretence or other, and put two horses extraordinary to it, if I had thought fit; and I could, when we had got to London, have sent it back, and nobody the wiser as to the lodgings we might have taken.</p>
					<p>I wish to the Lord you had permitted this. Indeed I think you are too punctilious a great deal for your situation. Would you expect to enjoy yourself with your usual placidness, and not to be ruffled, in an hurricane which every moment threatens to blow your house down?</p>
					<p>Had your distress sprung from yourself, that would have been another thing. But when all the world knows where to lay the fault, this alters the case.</p>
					<p>How can you say I am happy, when my mother, to her power, is as much an abettor of their wickedness to my dearest friend, as your aunt, or anybody else?⁠—and this through the instigation of that odd-headed and foolish uncle of yours, who (sorry creature that he is!) keeps her up to resolutions which are unworthy of her, for an example to me, if it please you. Is not this cause enough for me to ground a resentment upon, sufficient to justify me for accompanying you; the friendship between us so well known?</p>
					<p>Indeed, my dear, the importance of the case considered, I must repeat, that you are too nice. Don’t they already think that your noncompliance with their odious measures is owing a good deal to my advice? Have they not prohibited our correspondence upon that very surmise? And have I, but on your account, reason to value <em>what</em> they think?</p>
					<p>Besides, What discredit have I to fear by such a step? What detriment? Would Hickman, do you believe, refuse me upon it?⁠—If he did, should I be sorry for that?⁠—Who is it, that has a soul, who would not be affected by such an instance of female friendship?</p>
					<p>But I should vex and disorder my mother!⁠—Well, that is something: but not more than she vexes and disorders me, on her being made an implement by such a sorry creature, who ambles hither every day in spite to my dearest friend⁠—Woe be to <em>both</em>, if it be for a <em>double end</em>!⁠—Chide me, if you will: I don’t care.</p>
					<p>I say, and I insist upon it, such a step would <em>ennoble</em> your friend: and if still you will permit it, I will take the office out of Lovelace’s hands; and, tomorrow evening, or on Monday before his time of appointment takes place, will come in a chariot, or chaise: and then, my dear, if we get off as I wish, will we make terms (and what terms we please) with them all. My mother will be glad to receive her daughter again, I warrant: and Hickman will cry for <em>joy</em> on my return; or he shall for <em>sorrow</em>.</p>
					<p>But you are so very earnestly angry with me for proposing such a step, and have always so much to say for your side of <em>any</em> question, that I am afraid to urge it farther.⁠—Only be so good (let me add) as to encourage me to resume it, if, upon farther consideration, and upon weighing matters well, (and in <em>this</em> light, whether best to go off with <em>me</em>, or with <em>Lovelace</em>,) you can get over your punctilious regard for my reputation. A woman going away with a <em>woman</em> is not so discreditable a thing, surely! and with no view, but to <em>avoid the fellows</em>!⁠—I say, only to be so good, as to <em>consider</em> this point; and if you <em>can</em> get over your scruples on <em>my</em> account, do. And so I will have done with this argument for the present; and apply myself to some of the passages in yours.</p>
					<p>A time, I hope, will come, that I shall be able to read your affecting narratives without the impatient bitterness which now boils over in my heart, and would flow to my pen, were I to enter into the particulars of what you write. And indeed I am afraid of giving you my advice at all, or telling you what I should do in your case (supposing you will still refuse my offer; finding too what you have been brought or rather driven to without it); lest any evil should follow it: in which case, I should never forgive myself. And this consideration has added to my difficulties in writing to you now you are upon such a crisis, and yet refuse the only method⁠—but I said, I would not for the present touch any more that string. Yet, one word more, chide me if you please: If any harm betide you, I shall forever blame my mother⁠—indeed I shall⁠—and perhaps yourself, if you do not accept my offer.</p>
					<p>But one thing, in your present situation and prospects, let me advise: It is this, that if you <em>do</em> go off with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, you take the first opportunity to marry. Why should you <em>not</em>, when everybody will know by <em>whose</em> assistance, and in <em>whose</em> company, you leave your father’s house, go whithersoever you will?⁠—You may indeed keep him at a distance, until settlements are drawn, and suchlike matters are adjusted to your mind: but even these are matters of less consideration in your particular case, than they would be in that of most others: and first, <em>because</em>, be his other faults what they will, nobody thinks him an ungenerous man: next, <em>because</em> the possession of your estate must be given up to you as soon as your cousin Morden comes; who, as your trustee, will see it done; and done upon proper terms: 3dly, <em>because</em> there is no want of fortune on his side: 4thly, <em>because</em> all his family value you, and are extremely desirous that you should be their relation: 5thly, <em>because</em> he makes no scruple of accepting you without conditions. You see how he has always defied your relations: (I, for my own part, can forgive him for the fault: nor know I, if it be not a noble one:) and I dare say, he had rather call you <em>his</em>, without a shilling, than be under obligation to those whom he has full as little reason to love, as they have to love him. You have heard, that his own relations cannot make his proud spirit submit to owe any favour to them.</p>
					<p>For all these reasons, I think, you may the less stand upon previous settlements. It is therefore my absolute opinion, that, if you <em>do</em> withdraw with him, (and in that case you must let <em>him</em> be judge when he can leave you with safety, <em>you’ll observe that</em>,) you should not postpone the ceremony.</p>
					<p>Give this matter your most serious consideration. Punctilio is out of doors the moment you are out of your father’s house. I know how justly severe you have been upon those inexcusable creatures, whose giddiness and even want of decency have made them, in the <em>same hour</em> as I may say, leap from a parent’s window to a husband’s bed⁠—but considering Lovelace’s character, I repeat my opinion, that your <em>reputation</em> in the eye of the world requires no delay be made in <em>this</em> point, when once you are in his power.</p>
					<p>I need not, I am sure, make a stronger plea to you.</p>
					<p>You say, in excuse for my mother, (what my fervent love for my friend very ill brooks,) that we ought not to blame anyone for not doing what she has an opinion to do, or to let alone. This, in cases of friendship, would admit of very strict discussion. If the thing requested be of <em>greater</em> consequence, or even of <em>equal</em>, to the person sought to, and it were, as the old phrase has it, <q>to take a thorn out of one’s friend’s foot to put in into one’s own</q>, something might be said.⁠—Nay, it would be, I will venture to say, a selfish thing in us to ask a favour of a friend which would subject that friend to the <em>same</em> or <em>equal</em> inconvenience as that from which we wanted to be relieved, The requested would, in this case, teach his friend, by his <em>own</em> selfish example, with much <em>better</em> reason, to deny him, and despise a friendship so <em>merely</em> nominal. But if, by a <em>less</em> inconvenience to ourselves, we could relieve our friend from a <em>greater</em>, the refusal of such a favour makes the refuser unworthy of the name of friend: nor would I admit such a one, not even into the <em>outermost</em> fold of my heart.</p>
					<p>I am well aware that this is your opinion of friendship, as well as mine: for I owe the distinction to you, upon a certain occasion; and it saved me from a very great inconvenience, as you must needs remember. But you were always for making excuses for <em>other</em> people, in cases wherein you would not have allowed of one for <em>yourself</em>.</p>
					<p>I must own, that were these excuses for a friend’s indifference, or denial, made by anybody but <em>you</em>, in a case of such <em>vast</em> importance to herself, and of so comparative a <em>small</em> one to those for whose protection she would be thought to wish; I, who am forever, as you have often remarked, endeavouring to trace effects to their causes, should be ready to suspect that there was a latent, unowned inclination, which balancing, or <em>preponderating</em> rather, made the issue of the alternative (however important) sit more lightly upon the excuser’s mind than she cared to own.</p>
					<p>You will understand me, my dear. But if you do not, it may be well for me; for I am afraid I shall <em>have it</em> from you for but starting such a notion, or giving a hint, which perhaps, as you did once in another case, you will reprimandingly call, “Not being able to forego the ostentation of sagacity, though at the expense of that tenderness which is due to friendship and charity.”</p>
					<p>What signifies owning a fault without mending it, you’ll say?⁠—Very true, my dear. But you know I ever was a saucy creature⁠—ever stood in need of great allowances.⁠—And I remember, likewise, that I ever had them from my dear Clarissa. Nor do I doubt them now: for you know how much I love you⁠—if it be possible, <em>more</em> than <em>myself</em> I love you! Believe me, my dear: and, in consequence of that belief, you will be able to judge how much I am affected by your present distressful and critical situation; which will not suffer me to pass by without a censure even that <em>philosophy</em> of temper in your own cause, which you have not in another’s, and which all that know you ever admired you for.</p>
					<p>From this critical and distressful situation, it shall be my hourly prayers that you may be delivered without blemish to that fair fame which has hitherto, like your heart, been unspotted.</p>
					<p>With this prayer, twenty times repeated, concludes</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your ever affectionate,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Anna Howe.</p>
						<div epub:type="z3998:postscript">
							<p>I hurried myself in writing this; and I hurry Robin away with it, that, in a situation so very critical, you may have all the time possible to consider what I have written, upon two points so very important. I will repeat them in a very few words:</p>
							<p>“Whether you choose not rather to go off with one of <em>your own sex</em>; with your <strong>Anna Howe</strong>⁠—than with one of the other; with <strong><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace</strong>?”</p>
							<p>And if <em>not</em>,</p>
							<p>“Whether you should not marry him as soon as possible?”</p>
						</div>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
