<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 10: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-5-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday, <time datetime="06-02">June 2</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>Notwithstanding my studied-for politeness and complaisance for some days past; and though I have wanted courage to throw the mask quite aside; yet I have made the dear creature more than once look about her, by the warm, though decent expression of my passion. I have brought her to own, that I am <em>more</em> than indifferent with her: but as to <strong>love</strong>, which I pressed her to acknowledge, <q>what need of acknowledgments of that sort, when a woman consents to marrying</q>?⁠—And once repulsing me with displeasure, <q>the proof of true love I was vowing for her, was <strong>respect</strong>, not <strong>freedom</strong></q>. And offering to defend myself, she told me, that all the conception she had been able to form of a faulty passion, was, that it must demonstrate itself as mine sought to do.</p>
					<p>I endeavoured to justify my passion, by laying over-delicacy at her door. Over-delicacy, she said, was not <em>my</em> fault, if it were <em>hers</em>. She must plainly tell me, that I appeared to her incapable of distinguishing what were the requisites of a pure mind. Perhaps, had the <em>libertine</em> presumption to imagine, that there was no difference in <em>heart</em>, nor any but what proceeded from difference of <em>education</em> and <em>custom</em>, between the pure and impure⁠—and yet custom <em>alone</em>, as she observed, if I <em>did</em> so think, would make a second nature, as well in <em>good</em> as in <em>bad</em> habits.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>I have just now been called to account for some innocent liberties which I thought myself entitled to take before the women; as they suppose us to be married, and now within view of consummation.</p>
					<p>I took the lecture very hardly; and with impatience wished for the happy day and hour when I might call her all my own, and meet with no check from a niceness that had no example.</p>
					<p>She looked at me with a bashful kind of contempt. I thought it <em>contempt</em>, and required the reason for it; not being conscious of offence, as I told her.</p>
					<p>This is not the first time, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, said she, that I have had cause to be displeased with you, when <em>you</em>, perhaps, have not thought yourself exceptionable.⁠—But, Sir, let me tell you, that the married state, in my eye, is a state of purity, and (I <em>think</em> she told me) not of <em>licentiousness</em>; so, at least, I understood her.</p>
					<p><q>Marriage-purity</q>, Jack!⁠—Very comical, “faith⁠—yet, sweet dears, half the female world ready to run away with a rake, <em>because</em> he is a rake; and for no <em>other</em> reason; nay, every other reason <em>against</em> their choice of such a one.</p>
					<p>But have not you and I, Belford, seen young wives, who would be thought modest! and, when maids, were fantastically shy; permit freedoms in public from their uxorious husbands, which have shown, that both of them have forgotten what belongs either to prudence or decency? while every modest eye has sunk under the shameless effrontery, and every modest face been covered with blushes for those who could <em>not</em> blush.</p>
					<p>I once, upon such an occasion, proposed to a circle of a dozen, thus scandalized, to withdraw; since they must needs see that as well the <em>lady</em>, as the gentleman, wanted to be in private. This motion had its effect upon the amorous pair; and I was applauded for the check given to their licentiousness.</p>
					<p>But, upon another occasion of this sort, I acted a little more in character. For I ventured to make an attempt upon a bride, which I should not have had the courage to make, had not the unblushing passiveness with which she received her fond husband’s public toyings (looking round her with triumph rather than with shame, upon every lady present) incited my curiosity to know if the same complacency might not be shown to a private friend. ’Tis true, I was in honour obliged to keep the secret. But I never saw the turtles bill afterwards, but I thought of number two to the same female; and in my heart thanked the fond husband for the lesson he had taught his wife.</p>
					<p>From what I have said, thou wilt see, that I approve of my beloved’s exception to <em>public</em> loves. That, I hope, is all the charming icicle means by <q>marriage-purity</q>, but to return.</p>
					<p>From the whole of what I have mentioned to have passed between my beloved and me, thou wilt gather, that I have not been a mere dangler, a Hickman, in the passed days, though not absolutely active, and a Lovelace.</p>
					<p>The dear creature now considers herself as my wife-elect. The <em>unsaddened</em> heart, no longer prudish, will not now, I hope, give the sable turn to every address of the man she dislikes not. And yet she must keep up so much reserve, as will justify past inflexibilities. “Many and many a pretty soul would yield, were she not afraid that the man she favoured would think the worse of her for it.” That is also a part of the rake’s creed. But should she resent ever so strongly, she cannot now break with me; since, if she does, there will be an end of the family reconciliation; and that in a way highly discreditable to herself.</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Saturday, June 3.</p>
					<p>Just returned from Doctors Commons. I have been endeavouring to get a license. Very true, Jack. I have the mortification to find a difficulty, as the lady is of rank and fortune, and as there is no consent of father or <em>next friend</em>, in obtaining this <em>all-fettering</em> instrument.</p>
					<p>I made report of this difficulty. “It is very right,” she says, “that such difficulties should be made.”⁠—But not to a man of my known fortune, surely, Jack, though the woman were the daughter of a duke.</p>
					<p>I asked, if she approved of the settlements? She said, she had compared them with my mother’s, and had no objection to them. She had written to Miss Howe upon the subject, she owned; and to inform her of our present situation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-171" id="noteref-171" epub:type="noteref">171</a></p>
					<hr/>
					<p>Just now, in high good humour, my beloved returned me the draughts of the settlements: a copy of which I have sent to Captain Tomlinson. She complimented me, “that she never had any doubt of my honour in cases of this nature.”</p>
					<p>In matters between man and man nobody ever had, thou knowest.</p>
					<p>I had need, thou wilt say, to have some good qualities.</p>
					<p>Great faults and great virtues are often found in the same person. In nothing <em>very</em> bad, but as to women: and did not one of them begin with me.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-172" id="noteref-172" epub:type="noteref">172</a></p>
					<p>We have held, that women have no souls. I am a very Turk in this point, and willing to believe they have not. And if so, to whom shall I be accountable for what I do to them? Nay, if souls they have, as there is no sex in ethereals, nor need of any, what plea can a lady hold of injuries done her in her lady-<em>state</em>, when there is an end of her lady<em>ship</em>?</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
