<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 32: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-32" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday, <time datetime="08-25"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 25</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>You are very obliging, my dear Miss Howe, to account to me for your silence. I was easy in it, as I doubted not that, among such near and dear friends as you are with, you was diverted from writing by some such agreeable excursion as that you mention.</p>
					<p>I was in hopes that you had given over, at this time of day, those very sprightly airs, which I have taken the liberty to blame you for, as often as you have given me occasion to so do; and that has been very often.</p>
					<p>I was always very grave with you upon this subject: and while your own and a worthy man’s future happiness are in the question, I must enter into it, whenever you forget yourself, although I had not a day to live: and indeed I am very ill.</p>
					<p>I am sure it was not your intention to take your future husband with you to the little island to make him look weak and silly among those of your relations who never before had seen him. Yet do you think it possible for them (however prepared and resolved they may be to like him) to forbear smiling at him, when they see him suffering under your whimsical penances? A modest man should no more be made little in <em>his own eyes</em>, than in the eyes of <em>others</em>. If he be, he will have a diffidence, which will give an awkwardness to everything he says or does; and this will be no more to the credit of your choice than to that of the approbation he meets with from your friends, or to his own credit.</p>
					<p>I love an obliging, and even an <em>humble</em>, deportment in a man to the woman he addresses. It is a mark of his politeness, and tends to give her that opinion of herself, which it may be supposed bashful merit wants to be inspired with. But if the woman exacts it with an high hand, she shows not either her own politeness or gratitude; although I must confess she does her courage. I gave you expectations that I would be very serious with you.</p>
					<p>O my dear, that it had been my lot (as I was not permitted to live single,) to have met with a man by whom I could have acted generously and unreservedly!</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, it is now plain, in order to have a pretence against me, taxed my behaviour to him with stiffness and distance. You, at one time, thought me guilty of some degree of prudery. Difficult situations should be allowed for: which often make seeming occasions for censure unavoidable. I deserved not blame from <em>him</em> who made mine difficult. And you, my dear, had I any other man to deal with, or had he but half the merit which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman has, would have found that my doctrine on this subject should have governed my practice.</p>
					<p>But to put myself out of the question⁠—I’ll tell you what I should think, were I an indifferent bystander, of those high airs of yours, in return for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman’s humble demeanour. “The lady thinks of having the gentleman, I see plainly, would I say. But I see <em>as</em> plainly, that she has a very great indifference to him. And to what may this indifference be owing? To one or all of these considerations, no doubt: that she receives his addresses rather from motives of convenience than choice: that she thinks meanly of <em>his</em> endowments and intellects; at least more highly of <em>her own</em>: or, she has not the generosity to use that power with moderation, which his great affection for her puts into her hands.”</p>
					<p>How would you like, my dear, to have any of these things said?</p>
					<p>Then to give but the shadow of a reason for free-livers and free speakers to say, or to imagine, that Miss Howe gives her hand to a man who has no reason to expect any share in her heart, I am sure you would not wish that such a thing should be so much as supposed. Then all the regard from you to come <em>afterwards</em>; none to be shown <em>before</em>; must, should I think, be capable of being construed as a compliment to the <em>husband</em>, made at the expense of the <em>wife’s</em> and even of the sex’s <em>delicacy</em>!</p>
					<p>There is no fear that attempts could be formed by the most audacious (two Lovelaces there cannot be!) upon a character so revered for virtue, and so charmingly spirited, as Miss Howe’s: yet, to have any man encouraged to despise a husband by the example of one who is most concerned to do him honour; what, my dear, think you of that? It is but too natural for envious men (and who that knows Miss Howe, will not envy <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman!) to scoff at, and to jest upon, those who are treated with or will bear indignity from a woman.</p>
					<p>If a man so treated have a true and ardent love for the woman he addresses, he will be easily overawed by her displeasure: and this will put him upon acts of submission, which will be called <em>meanness</em>. And what woman of true spirit would like to have it said, that she would impose anything upon the man from whom she one day expects protection and defence, that should be capable of being construed as a meanness, or unmanly abjectness in his behaviour, even to herself?⁠—Nay, I am not sure, and I ask it of you, my dear, to resolve me, whether, in your own opinion, it is not likely, that a woman of spirit will <em>despise</em> rather than <em>value</em> more, the man who will take patiently an insult at her hands; especially <em>before company</em>.</p>
					<p>I have always observed, that prejudices in <em>disfavour</em> of a person at his first appearance, fix deeper, and are much more difficult to be removed <em>when</em> fixed, than prejudices in <em>favour</em>: whether owing to envy, or to that malignant principle so eminently visible in little minds, which makes them wish to bring down the more worthy characters to their own low level, I pretend not to determine. When once, therefore, a woman of your good sense gives room to the world to think she has not an high opinion of the <em>lover</em>, whom nevertheless she <em>entertains</em>, it will be very difficult for her afterwards to make that world think so well as she would have it of the <em>husband</em> she has chosen.</p>
					<p>Give me leave to observe, that to condescend with <em>dignity</em>, and to command with such <em>kindness</em>, and <em>sweetness of manners</em>, as should let the condescension, while in a single state, be seen and acknowledged, are points, which a wise woman, <em>knowing her man</em>, should aim at: and a wise woman, I should think, would choose to live single all her life rather than give herself to a man whom she thinks unworthy of a treatment so noble.</p>
					<p>But when a woman lets her lover see that she has the generosity to approve of and reward a well-meant service; that she has a mind that lifts her above the little captious follies, which some (too licentiously, I hope,) attribute to the sex in general: that she resents not (if ever she thinks she has reason to be displeased) with petulance, or through pride: nor thinks it necessary to insist upon little points, to come at or secure great ones, perhaps not proper to be aimed at: nor leaves room to suppose she has so much cause to doubt her own merit, as to put the love of the man she intends to favour upon disagreeable or arrogant trials: but let reason be the principal guide of her actions⁠—she will then never fail of that true respect, of that sincere veneration, which she wishes to meet with; and which will make her judgment after marriage consulted, sometimes with a <em>preference</em> to a man’s own; at other times as a delightful <em>confirmation</em> of his.</p>
					<p>And so much, my beloved Miss Howe, for this subject now, and I dare say, <em>forever</em>!</p>
					<p>I will begin another letter by-and-by, and send both together. Meantime, I am, <abbr>etc.</abbr></p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
