<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter II: Mr. Belford</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-9" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-9-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p class="explanatory">[In continuation]</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>The Colonel tells me that he had written to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Harlowe, by his servant, “That they might spare themselves the trouble of debating about a reconciliation; for that his dear cousin would probably be no more before they could resolve.”</p>
					<p>He asked me after his cousin’s means of subsisting; and whether she had accepted of any favour from <em>me</em>; he was sure, he said, she would not from <em>you</em>.</p>
					<p>I acquainted him with the truth of her parting with some of her apparel.</p>
					<p>This wrung his heart; and bitterly did he exclaim as well against you as against her implacable relations.</p>
					<p>He wished he had not come to England at all, or had come sooner; and hoped I would apprise him of the whole mournful story, at a proper season. He added, that he had thoughts, when he came over, of fixing here for the remainder of his days; but now, as it was impossible his cousin could recover, he would go abroad again, and resettle himself at Florence or Leghorn.</p>
					<p>The lady has been giving orders, with great presence of mind, about her body! directing her nurse and the maid of the house to put her in the coffin as soon as she is cold. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, she said, would know the rest by her will.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>She has just now given from her bosom, where she always wore it, a miniature picture, set in gold, of Miss Howe. She gave it to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lovick, desiring her to fold it up in white paper, and direct it, <em>To Charles Hickman, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></em> and to give it to me, when she was departed, for that gentleman.</p>
					<p>She looked upon the picture, before she gave it her⁠—<em>Sweet and ever-amiable friend!⁠—Companion!⁠—Sister!⁠—Lover!</em> said she⁠—and kissed it four several times, once at each tender appellation.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>Your other servant is come.⁠—Well may you be impatient!⁠—Well may you!⁠—But do you think I can leave off, in the middle of a conversation, to run and set down what offers, and send it away piecemeal as I write?⁠—If I <em>could</em>, must I not lose one half, while I put down the other?</p>
					<p>This event is nearly as interesting to <em>me</em> as it is to you. If you are more grieved than I, there can be but one reason for it; and that’s at your heart!⁠—I had rather lose all the friends I have in the world, (yourself in the number), than this divine lady; and shall be unhappy whenever I think of her sufferings, and of her merit; though I have nothing to reproach myself by reason of the former.</p>
					<p>I say not this, just now, so much to reflect upon you as to express my own grief; though your conscience I suppose, will make you think otherwise.</p>
					<p>Your poor fellow, who says that he begs for <em>his life</em>, in desiring to be dispatched back with a letter, tears this from me⁠—else, perhaps, (for I am just sent for down), a quarter of an hour would make you⁠—not <em>easy</em> indeed⁠—but <em>certain</em>⁠—and that, in a <em>state</em> like yours, to a <em>mind</em> like yours, is a relief.</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday Afternoon, four o’clock.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
