<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter XIX: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-19" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, Three o’clock, <time datetime="03-28">March 28</time></p>
					</header>
					<p>I have mentioned several times the pertness of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty to me; and now, having a little time upon my hands, I will give you a short dialogue that passed just now between us. It may, perhaps, be a little relief to you from the dull subjects with which I am perpetually teasing you.</p>
					<p>As she attended me at dinner, she took notice, That Nature is satisfied with a very little nourishment: and thus she complimentally proved it⁠—For, Miss, said she, you eat nothing; yet never looked more charmingly in your life.</p>
					<p>As to the former part of your speech, Betty, said I, you observe well; and I have often thought, when I have seen how healthy the children of the labouring poor <em>look</em>, and <em>are</em>, with empty stomachs, and hardly a good meal in a week, that God Almighty is very kind to his creatures, in this respect, as well as in all others in making <em>much</em> not necessary to the support of life; when three parts in four of His creatures, if it were, would not know how to obtain it. It puts me in mind of two proverbial sentences which are full of admirable meaning.</p>
					<p>What, pray, Miss, are they? I love to hear you talk, when you are so sedate as you seem now to be.</p>
					<p>The one is to the purpose we are speaking of: <q>Poverty is the mother of health</q>. And let me tell you, Betty, if I had a better appetite, and were to encourage it, with so little rest, and so much distress and persecution, I don’t think I should be able to preserve my reason.</p>
					<p><q>There’s no inconvenience but has its convenience</q>, said Betty, giving me proverb for proverb. But what is the other, Madam?</p>
					<p>That the <q>pleasures of the mighty are obtained by the tears of the poor</q>. It is but reasonable, therefore, methinks, that the plenty of the one should be followed by distempers; and that the indigence of the other should be attended with that health, which makes all its other discomforts light on the comparison. And hence a third proverb, Betty, since you are an admirer of proverbs: <q>Better a hare-foot than none at all</q>; that is to say, than not to be able to walk.</p>
					<p>She was mightily taken with what I said: See, returned she, what a fine thing scholarship is!⁠—I, said she, had always, from a girl, a taste for reading, though it were but in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mother Goose</i>, and concerning the <em>fairies</em> (and then she took genteelly a pinch of snuff): could but my parents <q>have let go as fast as I pulled</q>, I should have been a very happy creature.</p>
					<p>Very likely, you would have made great improvements, Betty: but as it is, I cannot say, but since I had the favour of your attendance in this <em>intimate</em> manner, I have heard smarter things from you, than I have heard at table from some of my brother’s fellow-collegians.</p>
					<p>Your servant, dear Miss; dropping me one of her best courtesies: so fine a judge as you are!⁠—It is enough to make one very proud. Then with another pinch⁠—I cannot indeed but say, bridling upon it, that I have heard famous scholars often and often say very silly things: things I should be ashamed myself to say; but I thought they did it out of humility, and in condescension to those who had not their learning.</p>
					<p>That she might not be too proud, I told her, I would observe, that the liveliness or quickness she so happily discovered in herself, was not so much an honour to her, as what she owed to her <em>sex</em>; which, as I had observed in many instances, had great advantages over the other, in all the powers that related to imagination. And hence, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty, you’ll take notice, as I have of late had opportunity to do, that your own talent at repartee and smartness, when it has <em>something to work upon</em>, displays itself to more advantage, than could well be expected from one whose friends, to speak in your own phrase, could not <em>let go so fast as you pulled</em>.</p>
					<p>The wench gave me a proof of the truth of my observation, in a manner still more alert than I had expected: If, said she, our sex had so much advantage in <em>smartness</em>, it is the less to be wondered at, that <em>you</em>, Miss, who have had such an education, should outdo all the men and <em>women</em> too, that come near you.</p>
					<p>Bless me, Betty, said I, what a proof do you give me of your wit and your courage at the same time! This is outdoing yourself. It would make young ladies less proud, and more apprehensive, were they generally attended by such smart servants, and their mouths permitted to be unlocked upon them as yours has been lately upon me.⁠—But, take away, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty.</p>
					<p>Why, Miss, you have eat nothing at all⁠—I hope you are not displeased with your dinner for anything I have said.</p>
					<p>No, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty, I am pretty well used to your freedoms now, you know.⁠—I am not displeased in the main, to observe, that, were the succession of modern fine ladies to be extinct, it might be supplied from those whom they place in the next rank to themselves, their chambermaids and confidants. Your young mistress has contributed a great deal to this quickness of yours. She always preferred your company to mine. As <em>you pulled, she let go</em>; and so, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty, you have gained by <em>her</em> conversation what I have lost.</p>
					<p>Why, Miss, if you come to that, nobody says better things than Miss Harlowe. I could tell you one, if <em>I pleased</em>, upon my observing to her, that you lived of late upon the air, and had no stomach to anything; yet looked as charmingly as ever.</p>
					<p>I dare say, it was a very good-natured one, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty! Do you then <em>please</em> that I shall hear it?</p>
					<p>Only this, Miss, <em>That your stomachfulness had swallowed up your stomach</em>; and, <em>That obstinacy was meat, drink, and clothes to you</em>.</p>
					<p>Ay, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty; and <em>did</em> she say this?⁠—I hope she laughed when she said it, as she does at all her <em>good things</em>, as she calls them. It was very smart, and very witty. I wish my mind were so much at ease, as to aim at being witty too. But if you admire such sententious sayings, I’ll help you to another; and that is, <em>Encouragement and approbation make people show talents they were never suspected to have</em>; and this will do both for mistress and maid. And another I’ll furnish you with, the contrary of the former, that will do only for me: That <em>persecution and discouragement depress</em> ingenuous <em>minds</em>, <em>and blunt the edge of lively imaginations</em>. And hence may my <em>sister’s</em> brilliancy and <em>my</em> stupidity be both accounted for. <em>Ingenuous</em>, you must know, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty, and <em>ingenious</em>, are two things; and I would not arrogate the latter to myself.</p>
					<p>Lord, Miss, said the foolish girl, you know a great deal for your years.⁠—You are a very learned young lady!⁠—What pity⁠—</p>
					<p>None of your <em>pitties</em>, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty, I know what you’d say. But tell me, if you can, Is it resolved that I shall be carried to my uncle Antony’s on Thursday?</p>
					<p>I was willing to reward myself for the patience she had made me exercise, by getting at what intelligence I could from her.</p>
					<p>Why, Miss, seating herself at a little distance (excuse my sitting down) with the snuffbox tapped very smartly, the lid opened, and a pinch taken with a dainty finger and thumb, the other three fingers distendedly bent, and with a fine flourish⁠—I cannot but say, that it is my opinion, you will certainly go on Thursday; and this <i xml:lang="fr">noless foless</i>, as I have heard my young lady say in <strong>French</strong>.</p>
					<p>Whether I am <em>willing</em> or <em>not willing</em>, you mean, I suppose, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty?</p>
					<p>You have it, Miss.</p>
					<p>Well but, Betty, I have no mind to be turned out of doors so suddenly. Do you think I could not be permitted to tarry one week longer?</p>
					<p>How can I tell, Miss?</p>
					<p>O <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty, you can tell a great deal, if <em>you please</em>. But here I am forbid writing to anyone of my family; none of it now will come near <em>me</em>; nor will any of it permit me to see <em>them</em>: How shall I do to make known my request, to stay here a week or fortnight longer?</p>
					<p>Why, Miss, I fancy, if you were to show a compliable temper, your friends would show a compliable one too. But would you expect favours, and grant none?</p>
					<p>Smartly put, Betty! But who knows what may be the result of my being carried to my uncle Antony’s?</p>
					<p>Who knows, Miss!⁠—Why anybody will guess what may be the result.</p>
					<p>As how, Betty?</p>
					<p><em>As how!</em> repeated the pert wench, Why, Miss, you will stand in your own light, as you have hitherto done: and your parents, as such good parents <em>ought</em>, will be obeyed.</p>
					<p>If, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty, I had not been used to your <em>oughts</em>, and to have my duty laid down to me by your oraculous wisdom I should be apt to stare at the liberty of your speech.</p>
					<p>You seem angry, Miss. I hope I take no unbecoming liberty.</p>
					<p>If thou really thinkest thou dost not, thy ignorance is more to be pitied, than thy pertness resented. I wish thou wouldst leave me to myself.</p>
					<p>When young ladies fall out with their own duty, it is not much to be wondered at, that they are angry at anybody who do <em>theirs</em>.</p>
					<p>That’s a very pretty saying, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty!⁠—I see plainly what <em>thy</em> duty is in <em>thy</em> notion, and am obliged to those who taught it thee.</p>
					<p>Everybody takes notice, Miss, that you can say very cutting words in a cool manner, and yet not call names, as I have <em>known some</em> gentlefolks as well as others do when in a passion. But I wish you had permitted ’Squire Solmes to see you: he would have told you such stories of ’Squire Lovelace, as you would have turned your heart against him forever.</p>
					<p>And know you any of the particulars of those sad stories?</p>
					<p>Indeed I don’t; but you’ll hear all at your uncle Antony’s, I suppose; and a great deal more perhaps than you will like to hear.</p>
					<p>Let me hear what I will, I am determined against <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes, were it to cost me my life.</p>
					<p>If you are, Miss, the Lord have mercy on you! For what with this letter of yours to ’Squire Solmes, whom they so much value, and what with their antipathy to ’Squire Lovelace, whom they hate, they will have no patience with you.</p>
					<p>What will they do, Betty? They won’t kill me? What <em>will</em> they do?</p>
					<p>Kill you! No!⁠—But you will not be suffered to stir from thence, till you have complied with your duty. And <em>no pen and ink</em> will be allowed you as here; where they are of opinion you make no good use of it: nor would it be allowed here, only as they intend so soon to send you away to your uncle’s. Nobody will be permitted to see you, or to correspond with you. What farther will be done, I can’t say; and, if I could, it may not be proper. But you may prevent all, by one word: and I wish you would, Miss. All then would be easy and happy. And, if I may speak my mind, I see not why one man is not as good as another: why, especially, a sober man is not as good as a rake.</p>
					<p>Well, Betty, said I, sighing, all thy impertinence goes for nothing. But I see I am destined to be a very unhappy creature. Yet I will venture upon one request more to them.</p>
					<p>And so, quite sick of the pert creature and of myself, I retired to my closet, and wrote a few lines to my uncle Harlowe, notwithstanding his prohibition; in order to get a reprieve from being carried away so soon as Thursday next, if I must go. And this, that I might, if complied with, suspend the appointment I have made with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace; for my heart misgives me as to meeting him; and that more and more; I know not why. Under the superscription of the letter, I wrote these words: “Pray, dear Sir, be pleased to give this a reading.”</p>
					<p>This is a copy of what I wrote:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday Afternoon.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Honoured Sir,</p>
						</header>
						<p>Let me this once be heard with patience, and have my petition granted. It is only, that I may not be hurried away so soon as next Thursday.</p>
						<p>Why should the poor girl be turned out of doors so suddenly, so disgracefully? Procure for me, Sir, one fortnight’s respite. In that space of time, I hope you will all relent. My mamma shall not need to shut her door in apprehension of seeing her disgraceful child. I will not presume to think of entering her presence, or my papa’s without leave. One fortnight’s respite is but a <em>small favour</em> for them to grant, except I am to be refused everything I ask; but it is of the <em>highest import</em> to my peace of mind. Procure it for me, therefore, dearest Sir; and you will exceedingly oblige</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your dutiful, though greatly afflicted niece,</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>I sent this down: my uncle was not gone: and he now stays to know the result of the question put to me in the enclosed answer which he has given to mind.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p>Your going to your uncle’s was absolutely concluded upon for next Thursday. Nevertheless, your mother, seconded by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes, pleaded so strongly to have you indulged, that your request for a delay will be complied with, upon one condition; and whether for a fortnight, or a shorter time, that will depend upon yourself. If you refuse the condition, your mother declares she will give over all further intercession for you.⁠—Nor do you deserve this favour, as you put it upon our yielding to you, not you to us.</p>
						<p>This condition is, that you admit of a visit from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes, for one hour, in company of your brother, your sister, or your uncle Antony, choose who you will.</p>
						<p>If you comply not, go next Thursday to a house which is become strangely odious to you of late, whether you get ready to go or not. Answer therefore directly to the point. No evasion. Name your day and hour. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes will neither eat you, nor drink you. Let us see, whether <em>we</em> are to be complied with <em>in anything</em>, or not.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">John Harlowe.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<hr/>
					<p>After a very little deliberation, I resolved to comply with this condition. All I fear is, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s intelligencer may inform him of it; and that his apprehensions upon it may make him take some desperate resolution: especially as now (having more time given me here) I think to write to him to suspend the interview he is possibly so sure of. I sent down the following to my uncle:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Honoured Sir,</p>
						</header>
						<p>Although I see not what end the proposed condition can answer, I comply with it. I wish I could with everything expected of me. If I must name one, in whose company I am to see the gentleman, and that <em>one</em> not my mamma, whose presence I could wish to be honoured by on the occasion, let my uncle, if he pleases, be the <em>person</em>. If I must name the <em>day</em>, (a long day, I doubt, will not be permitted me,) let it be next Tuesday.</p>
						<p>The <em>hour</em>, four in the afternoon. The <em>place</em> either the ivy summerhouse, or in the little parlour I used to be permitted to call mine.</p>
						<p>Be pleased, Sir, nevertheless, to prevail upon my mamma, to vouchsafe me her presence on the occasion.</p>
						<p>I am, Sir, your ever-dutiful</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>A reply is just sent me. I thought it became my averseness to this meeting, to name a distant day: but I did not expect they would have complied with it. So here is one week gained!</p>
					<p>This is the reply:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p>You have done well to comply. We are willing to think the best of every slight instance of duty from you. Yet have you seemed to consider the day as an evil day, and so put if far off. This nevertheless is granted you, as no time need to be lost, if you are as generous <em>after</em> the day, as we are condescending <em>before</em> it. Let me advise you, not to harden your mind; nor take up your resolution beforehand. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes has more awe, and even terror, at the thought of seeing you, than you can have at the thoughts of seeing him. <em>His</em> motive is <em>love</em>; let not <em>yours</em> be <em>hatred</em>. My brother Antony will be present, in hopes you will deserve well of <em>him</em>, by behaving well to the friend of the family. See you use him as such. Your mother had permission to be there, if she thought fit: but says, she would not for a thousand pound, unless you would encourage her beforehand as she wishes to be encouraged. One hint I am to give you meantime. It is this: <em>To make a discreet use of your pen and ink</em>. Methinks a young creature of niceness should be less ready to write to one man, when she is designed to be another’s.</p>
						<p>This compliance, I hope, will produce greater, and then the peace of the family will be restored: which is what is heartily wished by</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Your loving uncle, John Harlowe.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:postscript">Unless it be to the purpose our hearts are set upon, you need not write again.</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<hr/>
					<p>This man have <q>more terror at seeing me, than I can have at seeing him</q>!⁠—How can that be? If he had half as much, he would not wish to see me!⁠—His <em>motive love</em>!⁠—Yes, indeed! Love of himself! He knows no other; for love, that deserves the name, seeks the satisfaction of the beloved object more than its own. Weighed in this scale, what a profanation is this man guilty of!</p>
					<p><em>Not to take up my resolution beforehand!</em>⁠—That advice comes too late.</p>
					<p>But I must <q>make a discreet use of my pen</q>. That, I doubt, as they have managed it, in the sense they mean it, is as much out of my power, as the other.</p>
					<p>But <q>write to one man, when I am designed for another</q>!⁠—What a shocking expression is that!</p>
					<p>Repenting of my appointment with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace <em>before</em> I had this favour granted me, you may believe I hesitated not a moment to revoke it <em>now</em> that I had gained such a respite. Accordingly, I wrote, “That I found it inconvenient to meet him, as I had intended: that the risque I should run of a discovery, and the mischiefs that might flow from it, could not be justified by any end that such a meeting could answer: that I found one certain servant more in my way, when I took my morning and evening airings, than any other: that the person who might reveal the secrets of a family to <em>him</em>, might, if opportunity were given him, betray me, or him, to those whom it was his duty to serve: that I had not been used to a conduct so faulty, as to lay myself at the mercy of servants: and was sorry he had measures to pursue, that made steps necessary in his own opinion, which, in mine, were very culpable, and which no end could justify: that things drawing towards a crisis between my friends and me, an interview could avail nothing; especially as the method by which this correspondence was carried on was not suspected, and he could write all that was in his mind to write: that I expected to be at liberty to judge of what was proper and fit upon this occasion: especially as he might be assured, that I would sooner choose death, than <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes.”</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday Night.</p>
					<p>I have deposited my letter to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. Threatening as things look against me, I am much better pleased with myself for declining the interview than I was before. I suppose he will be a little out of humour upon it, however: but as I reserved to myself the liberty of changing my mind; and as it is easy for him to imagine there may be reasons for it <em>within-doors</em>, which he cannot judge of <em>without</em>; besides those I have suggested, which of themselves are of sufficient weight to engage his acquiescence; I should think it strange, if he acquiesces not on this occasion, and that with a cheerfulness, which may show me, that his last letter is written from his heart: For, if he be really so much concerned at his past faults, as he pretends, and has for some time pretended, must he not, of course, have corrected, in some degree, the impetuosity of his temper? The first step to reformation, as I conceive, is to subdue sudden gusts of passion, from which frequently the greatest evils arise, and to learn to bear disappointments. If the irascible passions cannot be overcome, what opinion can we have of the person’s power over those to which bad habit, joined to <em>greater</em> temptation, gives stronger force?</p>
					<p>Pray, my dear, be so kind as to make inquiry, by some safe hand, after the disguises <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace assumes at the inn he puts up at in the poor village of <em>Neale</em>, he calls it. If it be the same I take it to be, I never knew it was considerable enough to have a name; nor that it has an inn in it.</p>
					<p>As he must, to be so constantly near us, be much there, I would be glad to have some account of his behaviour; and what the people think of him. In such a length of time, he must by his conduct either give scandal, or hope of reformation. Pray, my dear, humour me in this inquiry. I have reason for it, which you shall be acquainted with another time, if the result of the inquiry discover them not.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
