<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 9: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</span>
				</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday Morning, Six o’clock</p>
					</header>
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty tells me, there is now nothing talked of but of my going to my uncle Antony’s. She has been ordered, she says, to get ready to attend me thither: and, upon my expressing my averseness to go, had the confidence to say, That having heard me often praise the <em>romanticness</em> of the place, she was astonished (her hands and eyes lifted up) that I should set myself against going to a house so much in <em>my taste</em>.</p>
					<p>I asked if this was her own insolence, or her young mistress’s observation?</p>
					<p>She half-astonished <em>me</em> by her answer: That it was hard she could not say a <em>good</em> thing, without being robbed of the merit of it.</p>
					<p>As the wench looked as if she really thought she had said a good thing, without knowing the boldness of it, I let it pass. But, to say the truth, this creature has surprised me on many occasions with her smartness: for, since she has been employed in this controlling office, I have discovered a great deal of wit in her assurance, which I never suspected before. This shows, that insolence is her talent: and that Fortune, in placing her as a servant to my sister, had not done so kindly by her as Nature; for that she would make a better figure as her <em>companion</em>. And indeed I can’t help thinking sometimes, that I myself was better fitted by <em>Nature</em> to be the servant of <em>both</em>, than the <em>mistress</em> of the <em>one</em>, or the <em>servant</em> of the <em>other</em>. And within these few months past, <em>Fortune</em> has acted by me, as if she were of the same mind.</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday, Ten o’clock</p>
					<p>Going down to my poultry-yard, just now, I heard my brother and sister and that Solmes laughing and triumphing together. The high yew-hedge between us, which divides the yard from the garden, hindered them from seeing me.</p>
					<p>My brother, as I found, has been reading part, or the whole perhaps, of the copy of his last letter⁠—Mighty prudent, and consistent, you’ll say, with their views to make me the wife of a man from whom they conceal not what, were I to be such, it would be kind in them to endeavour to conceal, out of regard to my future peace!⁠—But I have no doubt, that they hate me heartily.</p>
					<p>Indeed, you was up with her there, brother, said my sister. You need not have bid her not to write to you. I’ll engage, with all her wit, she’ll never pretend to answer it.</p>
					<p>Why, indeed, said my brother, with an air of college-sufficiency, with which he abounds, (for he thinks nobody writes like himself,) I believe I have given her a <em>choke-pear</em>. What say you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes?</p>
					<p>Why, Sir, said he, I think it is unanswerable. But will it not exasperate her more against me?</p>
					<p>Never fear, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes, said my brother, but we’ll carry our point, if she do not tire you out first. We have gone too far in this method to recede. Her cousin Morden will soon be here: so all must be over before that time, or she’ll be made independent of us all.</p>
					<p>There, Miss Howe, is the reason given for their jehu-driving.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes declared, that he was determined to persevere while my brother gave him any hopes, and while my father stood firm.</p>
					<p>My sister told my brother, that <q>he hit me charmingly</q> on the reason why I ought to converse with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes: but that he should not be so smart upon the sex, for the faults of <q>this perverse girl</q>.</p>
					<p>Some lively, and, I suppose, witty answer, my brother returned; for he and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes laughed outrageously upon it, and Bella, laughing too, called him a naughty man: but I heard no more of what they said; they walked on into the garden.</p>
					<p>If you think, my dear, that what I have related did not again fire me, you will find yourself mistaken when you read at this place the enclosed copy of my letter to my brother; struck off while the iron was red hot.</p>
					<p>No more call me meek and gentle, I beseech you.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> James Harlowe Friday Morning.</p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Sir,</p>
						</header>
						<p>If, notwithstanding your prohibition, I should be silent, on occasion of your last, you would, perhaps, conclude, that I was consenting to go to my uncle Antony’s upon the condition you mention. My father must do as he pleases with his child. He may turn me out of his doors, if he thinks fit, or give <em>you</em> leave to do it; but (loth as I am to say it) I should think it very hard to be carried by force to anybody’s house, when I have one of <em>my own</em> to go to.</p>
						<p>Far be it from me, notwithstanding yours and my sister’s provocations, to think of my taking my estate into my own hands, without my father’s leave: But why, if I must not stay any longer here, may I not be permitted to go thither? I will engage to see nobody they would not have me see, if this favour be permitted. <em>Favour</em> I call it, and am ready to receive and acknowledge it as such, although my grandfather’s will has made it a matter of right.</p>
						<p>You ask me, in a very unbrotherly manner, in the postscript to your letter, if I have not some new proposals to make? I <strong>have</strong> (since you put the question) three or four; <em>new ones</em> all, I think; though I will be bold to say, that, submitting the case to any one person whom <em>you</em> have not set against me, my <em>old</em> ones ought not to have been rejected. I <em>think</em> this; why then should I not <em>write</em> it?⁠—Nor have you any more reason to storm at your <em>sister</em> for telling it you, (since you seem in your letter to make it your boast how you turned my mother and my aunt Hervey against me,) than I have to be angry with my <em>brother</em>, for treating me as no brother ought to treat a sister.</p>
						<p>These, then, are my new proposals.</p>
						<p>That, as above, I may not be hindered from going to reside (under such conditions as shall be prescribed to me, which I will most religiously observe) at my grandfather’s late house. I will not again in this place call it <em>mine</em>. I have reason to think it a great misfortune that ever it was so⁠—<em>indeed</em> I have.</p>
						<p>If this be not permitted, I desire leave to go for a month, or for what time shall be thought fit, to Miss Howe’s. I dare say my mother will consent to it, if I have my father’s permission to go.</p>
						<p>If this, neither, be allowed, and I am to be turned out of my father’s house, I beg I may be suffered to go to my aunt Hervey’s, where I will inviolably observe her commands, and those of my father and mother.</p>
						<p>But if this, neither, is to be granted, it is my humble request, that I may be sent to my uncle Harlowe’s, instead of my uncle Antony’s. I mean not by this any disrespect to my uncle Antony: but his moat, with his bridge threatened to be drawn up, and perhaps the chapel there, terrify me beyond expression, notwithstanding your <em>witty</em> ridicule upon me for that apprehension.</p>
						<p>If this likewise be refused, and if I <em>must</em> be carried to the moated-house, which used to be a delightful one to me, let it be promised me, that I shall not be compelled to receive <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes’s visits there; and then I will as cheerfully go, as ever I did.</p>
						<p>So here, Sir, are your new proposals. And if none of them answer your end, as each of them tends to the exclusion of that ungenerous <em>persister’s</em> visits, be pleased to know, that there is no misfortune I will not submit to, rather than yield to give my hand to the man to whom I can allow no share in my heart.</p>
						<p>If I write in a style different from my usual, and different from what I wished to have occasion to write, an impartial person, who knew what I have accidentally, within this hour past, heard from your mouth, and my sister’s, and a third person’s, (particularly the reason you give for driving on at this violent rate, to wit, my cousin Morden’s soon-expected arrival,) would think I have but too much reason for it. Then be pleased to remember, Sir, that when my <q>whining vocatives</q> have subjected me to so much scorn and ridicule, it is time, were it but to <em>imitate</em> examples so excellent as <em>you</em> and my <em>sister</em> set me, that I should endeavour to assert my character, in order to be thought <em>less an alien</em>, and <em>nearer of kin to you both</em>, than either of you have of late seemed to suppose me.</p>
						<p>Give me leave, in order to <q>empty my female quiver</q> at once, to add, that I know no other reason which you can have for forbidding me to reply to you, after you have written what you pleased to me, than that you are conscious you cannot answer to reason and to justice the treatment you have given me.</p>
						<p>If it be otherwise, I, an unlearned, an unlogical girl, younger by near a third than yourself, will venture (so assured am I of the justice of my cause) to put my fate upon an issue with <em>you</em>: with <em>you</em>, Sir, who have had the advantage of an academical education; whose mind must have been strengthened by observation, and learned conversation, and who, pardon my going so low, have been accustomed to give <em>choke-pears</em> to those you vouchsafe to write against.</p>
						<p>Any impartial person, your late tutor, for instance, or the pious and worthy <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lewen, may be judge between us: and if either give it against me, I will promise to resign to my destiny: provided, if it be given against you, that my father will be pleased only to allow of my negative to the person so violently sought to be imposed upon me.</p>
						<p>I flatter myself, Brother, that you will the readier come into this proposal, as you seem to have a <em>high</em> opinion of your talents for argumentation; and not a <em>low</em> one of the cogency of the arguments contained in your last letter. And if I can possibly have no advantage in a contention with you, if the justice of my cause affords me not any (as you have no opinion it will,) it behoves you, methinks, to show to an impartial moderator that <em>I</em> am wrong, and <em>you</em> not so.</p>
						<p>If this be accepted, there is a necessity for its being carried on by the pen; the facts being stated, and agreed upon by both; and the decision to be given, according to the force of the arguments each shall produce in support of their side of the question: for give me leave to say, I know too well the <em>manliness</em> of your temper, to offer at a <em>personal</em> debate with you.</p>
						<p>If it be not accepted, I shall conclude, that you cannot defend your conduct towards me; and shall only beg of you, that, for the future, you will treat me with the respect due to a sister from a brother who would be thought as polite as learned.</p>
						<p>And now, Sir, if I have seemed to show some spirit, not foreign to the relation I have the honour to be to <em>you</em>, and to my <em>sister</em>; and which may be deemed not altogether of a piece with that part of my character which once, it seems, gained me everyone’s love; be pleased to consider to <em>whom</em>, and to <em>what</em> it is owing; and that this part of that character was not dispensed with, till it subjected me to that scorn, and to those insults, which a brother, who has been <em>so tenacious of an independence voluntarily</em> given up by me, and who has appeared <em>so exalted</em> upon it, ought not to have shown to <em>anybody</em>, much less to a <em>weak</em> and <em>defenceless</em> sister; who is, notwithstanding, an affectionate and respectful one, and would be glad to show herself to be so upon all future occasions; as she has in every action of her past life, although of late she has met with such unkind returns.</p>
						<footer>
							<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<hr/>
					<p>See, my dear, the force, and volubility, as I may say, of passion; for the letter I send you is my first draught, struck off without a blot or erasure.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday, Three o’clock</p>
					<p>As soon as I had transcribed it, I sent it down to my brother by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty.</p>
					<p>The wench came up soon after, all aghast, with a <em>Laud, Miss!</em> What <em>have</em> you done?⁠—What have you written? For you have set them all in a <em>joyful</em> uproar!</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>My sister is but this moment gone from me. She came up all in a flame; which obliged me abruptly to lay down my pen: she ran to me⁠—</p>
					<p>O Spirit! said she; tapping my neck a little <em>too</em> hard. And is it come to this at last⁠—!</p>
					<p>Do you beat me, Bella?</p>
					<p>Do you call this beating you? only tapping your shoulder <em>thus</em>, said she; tapping again more gently⁠—This is what we <em>expected</em> it would come to⁠—You want to be independent⁠—My father has lived too long for you⁠—!</p>
					<p>I was going to speak with vehemence; but she put her handkerchief before my mouth, very rudely⁠—You have done enough with your pen, mean listener, as you are!⁠—But <em>know</em> that neither your independent scheme, nor any of your visiting ones, will be granted you. Take your course, perverse one! Call in your rake to help you to an <em>independence</em> upon your parents, and a <em>dependence</em> upon him!⁠—Do so!⁠—Prepare this moment⁠—resolve what you will take with you⁠—tomorrow you go⁠—depend upon it tomorrow you go!⁠—No longer shall you stay here, watching and creeping about to hearken to what people say⁠—’Tis determined, child!⁠—You go tomorrow⁠—my brother would have come up to tell you so; but I persuaded him to the contrary⁠—for I know not what had become of you, if he had⁠—Such a letter! such an insolent, such a <em>conceited</em> challenger!⁠—O thou vain creature! But prepare yourself, I say⁠—tomorrow you go⁠—my brother will accept of your bold challenge; but it must be <em>personal</em>; and at my uncle Antony’s⁠—or perhaps at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes’s⁠—</p>
					<p>Thus she ran on, almost foaming with passion; till, quite out of patience, I said, No more of your violence, Bella⁠—Had I known in what way you designed to come up, you should not have found my chamber-door open⁠—talk to your <em>servant</em> in this manner. Unlike <em>you</em>, as I bless God I am, I am nevertheless your sister⁠—and let me tell you, that I won’t go tomorrow, nor next day, nor next day to that⁠—except I am dragged away by violence.</p>
					<p>What! not if your father or mother command it⁠—<em>Girl?</em> said she, intending another word, by her pause and manner before it came out.</p>
					<p>Let it come to <em>that</em>, Bella; then I shall know what to say. But it shall be from their own mouths, if I do⁠—not from yours, nor you Betty’s⁠—And say another word to me, in this manner, and be the consequence what it may, I will force myself into their presence; and demand what I have done to be used thus!</p>
					<p>Come along, Child! Come along, Meekness⁠—taking my hand, and leading me towards the door⁠—Demand it of them now⁠—you’ll find both your despised parents together!⁠—What! does your heart fail you?⁠—for I resisted, being thus insolently offered to be led, and pulled my hand from her.</p>
					<p>I want not to be led, said I; and since I can plead your invitation, I <em>will</em> go: and was posting to the stairs accordingly in my passion⁠—but she got between me and the door, and shut it⁠—</p>
					<p>Let me first, Bold one, said she, apprise them of your visit⁠—for your own sake let me⁠—for my brother is with them. But yet opening it again, seeing me shrink back⁠—Go, if you will!⁠—Why don’t you go?⁠—Why don’t you go, Miss?⁠—following me to my closet, whither I retired, with my heart full, and pulled the sash-door after me; and could no longer hold in my tears.</p>
					<p>Nor would I answer one word to her repeated aggravations, nor to her demands upon me to open my door (for the key was on the inside); nor so much as turn my head towards her, as she looked through the glass at me. And at last, which vexed her to the heart, I drew the silk curtain, that she should not see me, and down she went muttering all the way.</p>
					<p>Is not this usage enough to provoke a rashness never before thought of?</p>
					<p>As it is but too probable that I may be hurried away to my uncle’s without being able to give you previous notice of it; I beg that as soon as you shall hear of such a violence, you would send to the usual place, to take back such of your letters as may not have reached my hands, or to fetch any of mine that may be there.</p>
					<p>May you, my dear, be always happy, prays your</p>
					<footer>
						<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:postscript">I have received your four letters. But am in such a ferment, that I cannot at present write to them.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
