<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Her grandfather, in order to invite her to him as often as her other friends would spare her, indulged her in erecting and fitting up a dairy-house in her own taste. When finished, it was so much admired for its elegant simplicity and convenience, that the whole seat (before, of old time, from its situation, called <em>The Grove</em>) was generally known by the name of <em>The Dairy-house</em>. Her grandfather in particular was fond of having it so called. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s Letter, No. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span>, in which he briefly accounts for his conduct in this affair. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reason of this their more openly shown animosity is given in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-1-10.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-1-10.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-1-11.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-1-12.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-1-13.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-1-13.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-1-13.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-1-15.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-1-15.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-1-15.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="chapter-1-19.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <a href="chapter-1-19.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> <a href="chapter-1-19.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-1-28.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span>, for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s account of his behaviour and intentions in his appearance at church. <a href="chapter-1-30.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These gentlemen affected what they called the Roman style (to wit, the <em>thee</em> and the <em>thou</em>) in their letters: and it was an agreed rule with them, to take in good part whatever freedoms they treated each other with, if the passages were written in that style. <a href="chapter-1-31.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lovelace. <a href="chapter-1-31.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>. <a href="chapter-1-41.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span>. <a href="chapter-1-41.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alluding to his words in the preamble to the clauses in his will. See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-1-42.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</span>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</span>, for the occasion; and Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVIII</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</span> of the same volume, for the freedom Clarissa apologizes for. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Spectator</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 599. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Perhaps it will be unnecessary to remind the reader, that although <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace proposes (as above) to Miss Howe, that her fair friend should have recourse to the protection of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howe, if farther driven; yet he had artfully taken care, by means of his agent in the Harlowe family, not only to inflame the family against her, but to deprive her of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howe’s, and of every other protection, being from the first resolved to reduce her to an absolute dependence upon himself. See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span>. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span>. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These violent measures, and the obstinate perseverance of the whole family in them, will be the less wondered at, when it is considered, that all the time they were but as so many puppets danced upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s wires, as he boasts, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span>. <a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This poem, unattributed by Richardson, is by <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elizabeth_Carter">Elizabeth Carter</a>. <cite>—Editor</cite> <a href="chapter-2-10.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the next letter. <a href="chapter-2-13.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace accounts for this, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</span>. <a href="chapter-2-18.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span>. <a href="chapter-2-20.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-2-24.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>. <a href="chapter-2-24.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It will be seen in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span> that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s motive for sparing his Rosebud was twofold. First, Because his pride was gratified by the grandmother’s desiring him to spare her granddaughter. <q>Many a pretty rogue</q>, says he, <q>had I spared, whom I did not spare, had my power been acknowledged, and my mercy in time implored. But the <i xml:lang="la">debellare superbos</i> should be my motto, were I to have a new one</q>. His other motive will be explained in the following passage, in the same. <q>I never was so honest, for so long together</q>, says he, <q>since my matriculation. It <em>behoves</em> me so to be. <em>Some way or other</em> my recess (at this little inn) may be found out, and it then will be thought that my Rosebud has attracted me. A report in my favour, from simplicities so amiable, may establish me</q>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
					<p>Accordingly, as the reader will hereafter see, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace finds by the <em>effects</em>, his expectations from the contrivance he set on foot by means of his agent Joseph Leman (who plays, as above, upon Betty Barnes) fully answered, though he could not know what passed on the occasion between the two ladies. This explanation is the more necessary to be given, as several of our readers (through want of due attention) have attributed to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, on his behaviour to his Rosebud, a greater merit than was due to him; and moreover imagined, that it was improbable, that a man, who was capable of acting so generously (as they supposed) in <em>this</em> instance, should be guilty of any <em>atrocious</em> vileness. Not considering, that love, pride, and revenge as he owns in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span> were ingredients of equal force in his composition; and that resistance was a <em>stimulus</em> to him. <a href="chapter-2-27.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>She accordingly encloses <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s letter. But as the most material contents of it are given in her abstract, it is omitted. <a href="chapter-2-36.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-2-37.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>She was mistaken in this. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace <em>did</em> foresee this consequence. All his contrivances led to it, and the whole family, as he boasts, unknown to themselves, were but so many puppets danced by his wires. See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span>. <a href="chapter-2-39.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It may not be amiss to observe in this place, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace artfully contrived to drive the family on, by permitting his and their agent Leman to report machinations, which he had neither intention nor power to execute. <a href="chapter-2-41.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Note in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-2-41.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Ivy Summerhouse (or <em>Ivy Bower</em>, as it was sometimes called in the family) was a place, that from a girl, this young lady delighted in. She used, in the summer months, frequently to sit and work, and read, and write, and draw, and (when permitted) to breakfast, and dine, and sometimes to sup, in it; especially when Miss Howe, who had an equal liking to it, was her visitor and guest.</p>
					<p>She describes it, in another letter (which appears not) as “pointing to a pretty variegated landscape of wood, water, and hilly country; which had pleased her so much, that she had drawn it; the piece hanging up, in her parlous, among some of her other drawings.” <a href="chapter-2-42.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They might, no doubt, make a dependence upon the reasons she gives: but their chief reliance was upon the vigilance of their Joseph Leman; little imagining what an implement he was of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. <a href="chapter-2-42.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This, in another of her letters, (which neither is inserted,) is thus described:⁠—“A piece of ruins upon it, the remains of an old chapel, now standing in the midst of the coppice; here and there an overgrown oak, surrounded with ivy and mistletoe, starting up, to sanctify, as it were, the awful solemnness of the place: a spot, too, where a man having been found hanging some years ago, it was used to be thought of by us when children, and by the maidservants, with a degree of terror, (it being actually the habitation of owls, ravens, and other ominous birds,) as haunted by ghosts, goblins, specters: the genuine result of the country loneliness and ignorance: notions which, early propagated, are apt to leave impressions even upon minds grown strong enough at the same time to despise the like credulous follies in others.” <a href="chapter-2-42.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Well might he be so sure, when he had the art to play them off, by his corrupted agent, and to make them all join to promote his views unknown to themselves; as is shown in some of his preceding letters. <a href="chapter-2-44.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Numbers</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span>. Where it is declared, whose vows shall be binding, and whose not. The vows of a man, or of a widow, are there pronounced to be indispensable; because they are sole, and subject to no other domestic authority. But the vows of a single woman, or of a wife, if the father of the one, or the husband of the other, disallow of them as soon as they know them, are to be of no force.</p>
					<p>A matter highly necessary to be known; by all young ladies especially, whose designing addressers too often endeavour to engage them by vows; and then plead conscience and honour to them to hold them down to the performance. It cannot be amiss to recite the very words.</p>
					<p>Ver. 3 <q>If a woman vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind herself by a bond, being in her father’s house in her youth</q>;</p>
					<p>4. <q>And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her father shall hold his peace at her; then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand</q>.</p>
					<p>5. <q>But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth; not any of her vows or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand: and the Lord shall forgive her, because her father disallowed her</q>.</p>
					<p>The same in the case of a wife, as said above. See ver. 6, 7, 8, <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—All is thus solemnly closed:</p>
					<p>Ver. 16. <q>These are the statutes which the Lord commanded Moses between a man and his wife, between the father and his daughter, being yet in her youth in her father’s house</q>. <a href="chapter-2-45.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ecclesiasticus</span> 37:13, 14.</p>
					<p>Ecclesiasticus is a book originally included within the King James Bible, but now regarded as part of the Apocrypha. <cite>—Editor</cite> <a href="chapter-2-45.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is easy for such of the readers as have been attentive to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s manner of working, to suppose, from this hint of Miss Hervey’s, that he had instructed his double-faced agent to put his sweetheart Betty upon alarming Miss Hervey, in hopes she would alarm her beloved cousin, (as we see she does,) in order to keep her steady to her appointment with him. <a href="chapter-2-46.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>. <a href="chapter-2-46.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVI</span> <a href="chapter-3-2.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span>. <a href="chapter-3-3.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span>. <a href="chapter-3-3.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Clarissa has been censured as behaving to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, in their first conversation at <abbr>St.</abbr> Alban’s, and afterwards, with too much reserve, and even with haughtiness. Surely those, who have thought her to blame on this account, have not paid a due attention to the story. How early, as above, and in what immediately follows, does he remind her of the terms of distance which she had prescribed to him, before she was in his power, in hopes to leave the door open for a reconciliation with her friends, which her heart was set upon? And how artfully does he (unrequired) promise to observe the conditions in which she in her present circumstances and situation (in pursuance of Miss Howe’s advice) would gladly have dispensed with?⁠—To say nothing of the resentment she was under a necessity to show, at the manner of his getting her away, in order to justify to him the sincerity of her refusal to go off with him. See, in her subsequent Letter to Miss Howe, No. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>., her own sense upon the subject. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIII</span>. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</span>. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-9.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>. <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</span> <abbr>paragr.</abbr> 37, 38. <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span> and Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</span> <abbr><abbr>par.</abbr></abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span>. <abbr>par.</abbr> 4. See also Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>. <abbr>par.</abbr> 3. <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</span> <abbr>par.</abbr> 6, and 39. <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This will be farther explained in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</span>. <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-3-12.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span>. <a href="chapter-3-12.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span>. <a href="chapter-3-14.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-16.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace might have spared this caution on this occasion, since many of the sex (we mention it with regret) who on the first publication had read thus far, and even to the lady’s first escape, have been readier to censure her for over-niceness, as we have observed in a former note, [note 57], than him for artifices and exultations not less cruel and ungrateful, than ungenerous and unmanly. <a href="chapter-3-17.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The particular attention of such of the fair sex, as are more apt to read for the sake of amusement than instruction, is requested to this letter of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. <a href="chapter-3-18.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The story tells us, that whoever drank of this cup, if his wife were chaste, could drink without spilling; if otherwise, the contrary. <a href="chapter-3-18.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This word, whenever used by any of these gentlemen, was agreed to imply an inviolable secret. <a href="chapter-3-18.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-3-20.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-3-20.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span>. <a href="chapter-3-21.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See his Letter to Joseph Leman, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> towards the end, where he tells him, he would contrive for him a letter of this nature to copy. <a href="chapter-3-21.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace is as much out in his conjecture of Solomon, as of Socrates. The passage is in Ecclesiasticus, chap. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span>.</p>
					<p>Ecclesiasticus is a book originally included within the King James Bible, but now regarded as part of the Apocrypha. <cite>—Editor</cite> <a href="chapter-3-23.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See his reasons for proposing Windsor, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span>⁠—and her Hannah, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span>. <a href="chapter-3-24.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That he proposes one day to reform, and that he has sometimes good motions, see <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-3-24.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He had said, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span> that he would make reformation his stalking-horse, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-3-25.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This letter <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Greme (with no bad design on her part) was put upon writing by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace himself, as will be seen in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</span>. <a href="chapter-3-28.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <a href="chapter-3-28.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-28.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This inference of the Lady in his favour is exactly what he had hoped for. See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-29.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See this confirmed by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-29.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-29.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-29.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-29.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-29.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-29.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-30.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader will see how Miss Howe accounts for this, in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</span>. <a href="chapter-3-31.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Luke</span> 15:7. The parable is concerning the Ninety-nine Sheep, not the Prodigal Son, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace erroneously imagines. <a href="chapter-3-31.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-31.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader, perhaps, need not be reminded that he had taken care from the first (see <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span>) to deprive her of any protection from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howe. See in his next letter, a repeated account of the same artifices, and his exultations upon his inventions to impose upon the two such watchful ladies as Clarissa and Miss Howe. <a href="chapter-3-32.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</span>. <a href="chapter-3-33.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader is referred to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s next letter, for his motives in making the several proposals of which the Lady is willing to think so well. <a href="chapter-3-33.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Antonio Perez was first minister of Philip <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> king of Spain, by whose command he caused Don Juan de Escovedo to be assassinated: which brought on his own ruin, through the perfidy of his viler master.</p>
					<cite>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gedde’s Tracts</i></cite>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3-35.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-35.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-36.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-46.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. <a href="chapter-3-47.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The contents of the Letter referred to are given in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-49.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader who has seen his account, which Miss Howe could not have seen, when she wrote thus, will observe that it was not possible for a person of her true delicacy of mind to act otherwise than she did, to a man so cruelly and so insolently artful. <a href="chapter-3-50.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-50.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</span>. <a href="chapter-3-50.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-51.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-51.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This letter was from Miss Arabella Harlowe. See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LV</span>. <a href="chapter-3-51.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</span>. <a href="chapter-3-52.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Notwithstanding what <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hervey here says, it will be hereafter seen that this severe letter was written in private concert with the implacable Arabella. <a href="chapter-3-52.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, in his next Letter, tells his friend how extremely ill the Lady was, recovering from fits to fall into stronger fits, and nobody expecting her life. She had not, he says, acquainted Miss Howe how very ill she was.⁠—In the next Letter, she tells Miss Howe, that her motives for suspending were not merely ceremonious ones. <a href="chapter-3-58.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</span> and Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-59.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-59.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-60.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-62.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-3-62.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. See also <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>. <a href="chapter-4-4.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVIII</span>. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-4-4.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> reminds <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace of some particular topics which passed in their conversation, extremely to the Lady’s honour. <a href="chapter-4-7.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> above referred to. <a href="chapter-4-7.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> <abbr><abbr>Paragr.</abbr></abbr> 4. <a href="chapter-4-17.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LI</span> <abbr><abbr>Paragr.</abbr></abbr> 9. <a href="chapter-4-17.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Phyl-tits, <abbr>q. d.</abbr> Phyllis-tits, in opposition to Tom-tits. It needs not now be observed, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, in this wanton gaiety of his heart, often takes liberties of coining words and phrases in his letters to this his familiar friend. See his ludicrous reason for it in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span>. <abbr><abbr>Paragr.</abbr></abbr> <abbr class="eoc">antepenult.</abbr> <a href="chapter-4-17.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-4-19.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LII</span>. <a href="chapter-4-20.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-4-20.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-20.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Clarissa proposes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman to write for Miss Howe. See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Paragr.</abbr> 5, &amp; <abbr class="eoc">ult.</abbr> <a href="chapter-4-23.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-23.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-4-23.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-29.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <a href="chapter-4-29.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-4-29.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We cannot forbear observing in this place, that the Lady has been particularly censured, even by some of her own sex, as overnice in her part of the above conversations: but surely this must be owing to want of attention to the <em>circumstances</em> she was in, and to her <em>character</em>, as well as to the <em>character of the man she had to deal with</em>: for, although she could not be supposed to know so much of his designs as the reader does by means of his letters to Belford, yet she was but too well convinced of his faulty morals, and of the necessity there was, from the whole of his behaviour to her, to keep such an encroacher, as she frequently calls him, at a distance. In Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> the reader will see, that upon some favourable appearances she blames herself for her readiness to suspect him. <q>But his character, his principles</q>, said she, <q>are so faulty!⁠—He is so light, so vain, so various.⁠—Then, my dear, I have no guardian to depend upon.</q> In Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <q>Must I not with such a man</q>, says she, <q>be wanting to myself, were I not jealous and vigilant?</q></p>
					<p>By this time the reader will see, that she had still <em>greater</em> reason for her jealousy and vigilance. And Lovelace will tell the sex, as he does in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <q>that the woman who resents not initiatory freedoms, must be lost. Love is an encroacher</q>, says he: <q>loves never goes backward. Nothing but the highest act of love can satisfy</q> an indulged love.</p>
					<p>But the reader perhaps is too apt to form a judgment of Clarissa’s conduct in critical cases by <em>Lovelace’s complaints of her coldness</em>; not considering his views upon her; and that she is proposed as an <em>example</em>; and therefore in her trials and distresses must not be allowed to dispense with those rules which perhaps some others of the sex, in her delicate situation, would not have thought themselves so strictly bound to observe; although, if she had not observed them, a <em>Lovelace</em> would have carried all his points. <a href="chapter-4-33.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-35.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-35.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-4-37.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-37.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-41.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-41.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-41.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-4-44.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <a href="chapter-4-44.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <a href="chapter-4-44.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-44.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-44.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-45.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>She tells Miss Howe, that she saw this motion in the pier-glass. See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-45.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-45.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Parag.</abbr> 2. <a href="chapter-4-46.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLI</span>. <a href="chapter-4-53.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Within these few years past, a passage has been made from the prison to the sessions-house, whereby malefactors are carried into court without going through the street. Lovelace’s triumph on their supposed march shows the wisdom of this alteration. <a href="chapter-4-54.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny gives this account, putting the number of men slain at 1,100,092. See also Lipsius de Constandia. <a href="chapter-4-54.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span>. <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-5-3.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-3.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span>, &amp; <abbr class="eoc">seq.</abbr> <a href="chapter-5-3.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span>. <a href="chapter-5-5.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">L</span>. <a href="chapter-5-5.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span>. See also <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s own confession of the delight he takes in a woman’s tears, in different parts of his letters. <a href="chapter-5-8.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That the Lady judges rightly of him in this place, see <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span> where, giving the motive for his generosity to his Rosebud, he says⁠—“As I make it my rule, whenever I have committed a very capital enormity, to do some good by way of atonement; and as I believe I am a pretty deal indebted on that score; I intend to join an hundred pounds to Johnny’s aunt’s hundred pounds, to make one innocent couple happy.”⁠—Besides which motive, he had a further view in answer in that instance of his generosity; as may be seen in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>. See also the note,<abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 170, 171.</p>
					<p>To show the consistence of his actions, as they now appear, with his views and principles, as he lays them down in his <em>first letters</em>, it may be not amiss to refer the reader to his letters,<abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</span>.</p>
					<p>See also <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span>⁠—and Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</span> for Clarissa’s early opinion of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace.⁠—Whence the coldness and indifference to him, which he so repeatedly accuses her of, will be accounted for, more to <em>her</em> glory, than to <em>his</em> honour. <a href="chapter-5-8.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-9.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-9.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As this letter of the Lady to Miss Howe contains no new matter, but what may be collected from one of those of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, it is omitted. <a href="chapter-5-10.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span>. <a href="chapter-5-10.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pamela</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span> these reasons are given, and are worthy of every parent’s consideration, as is the whole Letter, which contains the debate between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> and his Pamela, on the important subject of mothers being nurses to their own children. <a href="chapter-5-11.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <a href="chapter-5-13.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-13.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-13.xhtml#noteref-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. See also Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span> of that volume. <a href="chapter-5-13.xhtml#noteref-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</span>. <a href="chapter-5-14.xhtml#noteref-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. <a href="chapter-5-14.xhtml#noteref-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>. <a href="chapter-5-14.xhtml#noteref-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>. <a href="chapter-5-14.xhtml#noteref-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-14.xhtml#noteref-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-14.xhtml#noteref-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-18.xhtml#noteref-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-18.xhtml#noteref-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-18.xhtml#noteref-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-18.xhtml#noteref-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-18.xhtml#noteref-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVI</span>. <a href="chapter-5-20.xhtml#noteref-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVIII</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</span>. <a href="chapter-5-20.xhtml#noteref-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LVI</span>, paragraph 12, and Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LVIII</span>, paragraph 12.⁠—Where the reader will observe, that the proposal came from herself; which, as it was also mentioned by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, (towards the end of Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>.) she may be presumed to have forgotten. So that Clarissa had a double inducement for acquiescing with the proposed method of carrying on the correspondence between Miss Howe and herself by Wilson’s conveyance, and by the name of Laetitia Beaumont. <a href="chapter-5-20.xhtml#noteref-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-5-20.xhtml#noteref-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He means the freedom <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace took with her before the fire-plot. See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. When Miss Howe wrote this letter she could not know of that. <a href="chapter-5-20.xhtml#noteref-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-20.xhtml#noteref-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton’s letter, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span>. <a href="chapter-5-20.xhtml#noteref-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-23.xhtml#noteref-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fashionable wigs at that time. <a href="chapter-5-23.xhtml#noteref-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>And here, Belford, lest thou, through inattention, should be surprised at my assurance, let me remind thee (and that, thus, by way of marginal observation, that I may not break in upon my narrative) that this my intrepidity concerted (as I have from time to time acquainted thee) in apprehension of such an event as has fallen out. For had not the dear creature already passed for my wife before no less than four worthy gentlemen of family and fortune?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-467" id="noteref-467" epub:type="noteref">467</a> and before <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sinclair, and her household, and Miss Partington? And had she not agreed to her uncle’s expedient, that she <em>should</em> pass for such, from the time of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman’s application to that uncle;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-468" id="noteref-468" epub:type="noteref">468</a> and that the worthy <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Tomlinson should be allowed to propagate that belief: as he had actually reported to two families (<em>they possibly to more</em>); purposely that it might come to the ears of James Harlowe; and serve for a foundation for uncle John to build his reconciliation-scheme upon?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-469" id="noteref-469" epub:type="noteref">469</a> And canst thou think that nothing was meant by all this contrivance? and that I am not still <em>further</em> prepared to support my story?</p>
					<p>Indeed, I little thought, at the time that I formed these precautionary schemes, that she would ever have been able, if <em>willing</em>, to get out of my hands. All that I hoped I should have occasion to have recourse to them for, was only, in case I should have the courage to make the grand attempt, and should succeed in it, to bring the dear creature (<em>and this out of tenderness to her</em>, for what attention did I ever yet pay to the grief, the execrations, the tears of a woman I had triumphed over?) to bear me in her sight: to expostulate with me, to be pacified by my pleas, and by my own future hopes, founded upon the reconciliatory-project, upon my reiterated vows, and upon the Captain’s assurances. Since in that case, to forgive me, to have gone on with me, <em>for a week</em>, would have been to forgive me, to have gone on with me, <em>forever</em>. And that, had my eligible life of honour taken place, her trials would all have been then over: and she would have known nothing but gratitude, love, and joy, to the end of one of our lives. For never would I, never could I, have abandoned such an admirable creature as this. Thou knowest I never was a sordid villain to any of her inferiors⁠—Her <em>inferiors</em>, I may say⁠—For who is not her inferior? <a href="chapter-5-24.xhtml#noteref-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-5-24.xhtml#noteref-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What is between hooks [ } thou mayest suppose, Jack, I sunk upon the women, in the account I gave them of the contents of this letter. <a href="chapter-5-24.xhtml#noteref-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I gave <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Moore and Miss Rawlins room to think this reproach <em>just</em>, Jack. <a href="chapter-5-24.xhtml#noteref-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-25.xhtml#noteref-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-26.xhtml#noteref-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, where Miss Howe says, <q>Alas! my dear, I know you loved him!</q> <a href="chapter-5-27.xhtml#noteref-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-5-27.xhtml#noteref-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-27.xhtml#noteref-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-30.xhtml#noteref-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-5-32.xhtml#noteref-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</span> and <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span>. <a href="chapter-5-32.xhtml#noteref-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-32.xhtml#noteref-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-32.xhtml#noteref-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-5-34.xhtml#noteref-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-35.xhtml#noteref-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-36.xhtml#noteref-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIV</span>. <a href="chapter-5-36.xhtml#noteref-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The nature of the Bath stone, in particular. <a href="chapter-5-36.xhtml#noteref-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>. <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The lady innocently means <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s forged one. See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span>. <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span> for what she herself says on that steadiness which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, though a deserved sufferer by it, cannot help admiring. <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-6.xhtml#noteref-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>. <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the account of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Townsend, <abbr>etc.</abbr> see <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He alludes here to the story of a pope, who, (once a poor fisherman,) through every preferment he rose to, even to that of the cardinalate, hung up in view of all his guests his net, as a token of humility. But, when he arrived at the pontificate, he took it down, saying, that there was no need of the net, when he had caught the fish. <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Howe, in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span> says, That she was always more afraid of Clarissa than of her mother; and, in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIV</span>. That she fears her almost as much as she loves her; and in many other places, in her letters, verifies this observation of Lovelace. <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-8.xhtml#noteref-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-8.xhtml#noteref-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ecclesiasticus <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span>: The whoredom of a woman may be known in her haughty looks and eyelids. Watch over an impudent eye, and marvel not if it trespass against thee. <a href="chapter-6-10.xhtml#noteref-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-11.xhtml#noteref-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-14.xhtml#noteref-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Her cousin Morden’s words to her in his letter from Florence. See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span>. <a href="chapter-6-18.xhtml#noteref-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-23.xhtml#noteref-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-28.xhtml#noteref-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>She tried to do this; but was prevented by the fellow’s pretending to put his ankle out, by a slip downstairs⁠—<em>A trick</em>, says his contriving master, in his omitted relation, <em>I had taught him, on a like occasion, at Amiens</em>. <a href="chapter-6-28.xhtml#noteref-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>. <a href="chapter-6-30.xhtml#noteref-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-30.xhtml#noteref-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-30.xhtml#noteref-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Lady, in her minutes, says, “I fear Dorcas is a false one. May I not be able to prevail upon him to leave me at my liberty? Better to try than to trust to her. If I cannot prevail, but must meet him and my uncle, I hope I shall have fortitude enough to renounce him then. But I would fain avoid qualifying with the wretch, or to give him an expectation which I intend not to answer. If I am mistress of my own resolutions, my uncle himself shall not prevail with me to bind my soul in covenant with so vile a man.” <a href="chapter-6-31.xhtml#noteref-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Lady, in her minutes, owns the difficulty she lay under to keep her temper in this conference. “But when I found,” says she, “that all my entreaties were ineffectual, and that he was resolved to detain me, I could no longer withhold my impatience.” <a href="chapter-6-31.xhtml#noteref-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Lady mentions, in her memorandum-book, that she had no other way, as is apprehended, to save herself from instant dishonour, but by making this concession. Her only hope, now, she says, if she cannot escape by Dorcas’s connivance, (whom, nevertheless she suspects,) is to find a way to engage the protection of her uncle, and even of the civil magistrate, on Thursday next, if necessary. “He shall see,” says she, “tame and timid as he thought me, what I dare to do, to avoid so hated a compulsion, and a man capable of a baseness so premeditatedly vile and inhuman.” <a href="chapter-6-31.xhtml#noteref-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-31.xhtml#noteref-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The lady had made an attempt to send away a letter. <a href="chapter-6-39.xhtml#noteref-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the preceding Letter. <a href="chapter-6-44.xhtml#noteref-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the next Letter. <a href="chapter-6-44.xhtml#noteref-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-48.xhtml#noteref-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-48.xhtml#noteref-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-49.xhtml#noteref-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton, having only the family representation and invectives to form her judgment upon, knew not that Clarissa had determined against going off with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace; nor how solicitous she had been to procure for herself <em>any other</em> protection than his, when she apprehended that, if she stayed, she had no way to avoid being married to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes. <a href="chapter-6-56.xhtml#noteref-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the next letter. <a href="chapter-6-64.xhtml#noteref-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>. <a href="chapter-6-65.xhtml#noteref-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-65.xhtml#noteref-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-65.xhtml#noteref-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-6-65.xhtml#noteref-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The letter she encloses was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s forged one. See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span>. <a href="chapter-6-66.xhtml#noteref-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span>. <a href="chapter-6-66.xhtml#noteref-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-67.xhtml#noteref-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>His forged letter. See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span>. <a href="chapter-6-68.xhtml#noteref-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is proper to observe, that there was a more natural reason than this that the Lady gives for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s blushing. It was a blush of indignation, as he owned afterwards to his friend Belford, in conversation; for the pretended Lady Betty had mistaken her cue, in condemning the house; and he had much ado to recover the blunder; being obliged to follow her lead, and vary from his first design; which was to have the people of the house spoken well of, in order to induce her to return to it, were it but on pretence to direct her clothes to be carried to Hampstead. <a href="chapter-6-68.xhtml#noteref-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The attentive reader need not be referred back for what the Lady nevertheless could not account for, as she knew not that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace had come at Miss Howe’s letters; particularly that in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span> which he comments upon in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIV</span> of the same volume. <a href="chapter-6-70.xhtml#noteref-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span>. <a href="chapter-6-71.xhtml#noteref-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>. <a href="chapter-6-71.xhtml#noteref-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-71.xhtml#noteref-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lewen, in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> presses her to this public prosecution, by arguments worthy of his character; which she answers in a manner worthy of hers. See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span> of that volume. <a href="chapter-6-73.xhtml#noteref-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the note in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-73.xhtml#noteref-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The seven-o’clock prayers at <abbr>St.</abbr> Dunstan’s have been since discontinued. <a href="chapter-7-2.xhtml#noteref-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-9.xhtml#noteref-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-21.xhtml#noteref-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-23.xhtml#noteref-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-23.xhtml#noteref-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-23.xhtml#noteref-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was printed as June in the published work but is clearly an error. <cite>—Editor</cite> <a href="chapter-7-24.xhtml#noteref-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s billet to Miss Howe, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-28.xhtml#noteref-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-29.xhtml#noteref-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The 24th of July, Miss Clarissa Harlowe’s birthday. <a href="chapter-7-40.xhtml#noteref-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the preceding Letter. <a href="chapter-7-41.xhtml#noteref-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-41.xhtml#noteref-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-41.xhtml#noteref-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-41.xhtml#noteref-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-41.xhtml#noteref-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Those parts of this letter which are marked with an inverted comma (thus ‹) were afterwards transcribed by Miss Howe in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LV</span> written to the Ladies of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s family; and are thus distinguished to avoid the necessity of repeating them in that letter. <a href="chapter-7-41.xhtml#noteref-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXIII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-41.xhtml#noteref-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXIII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-42.xhtml#noteref-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-42.xhtml#noteref-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was erroneously given as Thursday in the original. <cite>—Editor</cite> <a href="chapter-7-49.xhtml#noteref-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span>. <a href="chapter-7-49.xhtml#noteref-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-49.xhtml#noteref-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>She takes in the time that she appointed to meet <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. <a href="chapter-7-50.xhtml#noteref-303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-52.xhtml#noteref-304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-52.xhtml#noteref-305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-52.xhtml#noteref-306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-52.xhtml#noteref-307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace could not know, that the lady was so thoroughly sensible of the solidity of this doctrine, as she really was: for, in her letter to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton, (Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>,) she says⁠—“Nor let it be imagined, that my present turn of mind proceeds from gloominess or melancholy: for although it was brought on by disappointment, (the world showing me early, even at my first <em>rushing</em> into it, its true and ugly face,) yet I hope, that it has obtained a better root, and will every day more and more, by its fruits, demonstrate to me, and to all my friends, that it has.” <a href="chapter-7-53.xhtml#noteref-308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-309" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Lithuania, the women are said to have <em>so allowedly</em> their gallants, called adjutores, that the husbands hardly ever enter upon any part of pleasure without them. <a href="chapter-7-53.xhtml#noteref-309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LIV</span>. <a href="chapter-7-53.xhtml#noteref-310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-53.xhtml#noteref-311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-53.xhtml#noteref-312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVI</span> and Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-53.xhtml#noteref-313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-53.xhtml#noteref-314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-53.xhtml#noteref-315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span>. <a href="chapter-7-59.xhtml#noteref-316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lewen. <a href="chapter-7-63.xhtml#noteref-317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-65.xhtml#noteref-318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-65.xhtml#noteref-319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Miss Harlowe’s Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-69.xhtml#noteref-320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-71.xhtml#noteref-321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the paragraph marked with an inverted comma (thus ‹), Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-73.xhtml#noteref-322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the fire-scene,<abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. <a href="chapter-7-77.xhtml#noteref-323" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span> in the penknife-scene. <a href="chapter-7-77.xhtml#noteref-324" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-81.xhtml#noteref-325" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-326" epub:type="endnote">
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>1.</p>
								</td>
								<td>A letter from Miss Montague, dated</td>
								<td>
									<p>
										<time datetime="08-01"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 1.</time>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>2.</p>
								</td>
								<td>A copy of my answer</td>
								<td>
									<p>
										<time datetime="08-03"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 3.</time>
									</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>3.</p>
								</td>
								<td><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford’s Letter to me, which will show you what my request was to him, and his compliance with it; and the desired extracts from his friend’s letters</td>
								<td>
									<p><time datetime="08-03"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 3</time>, <time datetime="08-04">4</time>.</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>4.</p>
								</td>
								<td>A copy of my answer, with thanks; and requesting him to undertake the executor-ship</td>
								<td>
									<p><time datetime="08-04"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 4</time>.</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>5.</p>
								</td>
								<td><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford’s acceptance of the trust</td>
								<td>
									<p><time datetime="08-04"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 4</time>.</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>6.</p>
								</td>
								<td>Miss Montague’s letter, with a generous offer from Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> and the Ladies of that family</td>
								<td>
									<p><time datetime="08-07"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 7</time>.</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>7.</p>
								</td>
								<td><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s to me</td>
								<td>
									<p><time datetime="08-07"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 7</time>.</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>8.</p>
								</td>
								<td>Copy of mine to Miss Montague, in answer to hers of the day before</td>
								<td>
									<p><time datetime="08-08"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 8</time>.</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>9.</p>
								</td>
								<td>Copy of my answer to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace</td>
								<td>
									<p><time datetime="08-11"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 11</time>.</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-326" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-327" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-328" epub:type="endnote">
					<table>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>1.</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>A copy of mine to my sister, begging off my father’s malediction</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>dated July 21</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>2.</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>My sister’s answer</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>dated July 27</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>3.</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>Copy of my second letter to my sister</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>dated July 29</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>4.</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>My sister’s answer</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>dated <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 3</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>5.</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>Copy of my Letter to my mother</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>dated <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 5</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>6.</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>My uncle Harlowe’s letter</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>dated <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 7</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>7.</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>Copy of my answer to it</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>dated the 10th</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>8.</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>Letter from my uncle Antony</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>dated the 12th</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td>
									<p>9.</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>And lastly, the copy of my answer to it</p>
								</td>
								<td>
									<p>dated the 13th</p>
								</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8-6.xhtml#noteref-328" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>She means that of making <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford her executor. <a href="chapter-8-6.xhtml#noteref-329" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-330" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For what these gentlemen mean by the Roman style, see <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span> in the first note. <a href="chapter-8-7.xhtml#noteref-330" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-331" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXI</span>. <a href="chapter-8-7.xhtml#noteref-331" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-332" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Textual error: was shown in original as <time datetime="08-15"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 15</time>. <cite>—Editor</cite> <a href="chapter-8-9.xhtml#noteref-332" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-333" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford’s objections, That virtue ought not to suffer in a tragedy, is not well considered: Monimia in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Orphean</i>, Belvidera in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Venice Preserved</i>, Athenais in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Theodosius</i>, Cordelia in Shakespeare’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">King Lear</i>, Desdemona in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Othello</i>, Hamlet, (to name no more,) are instances that a tragedy could hardly be justly called a tragedy, if virtue did not temporarily suffer, and vice for a while triumph. But he recovers himself in the same paragraph; and leads us to look up to the <strong>future</strong> for the reward of virtue, and for the punishment of guilt: and observes not amiss, when he says, He knows not but that the virtue of such a woman as Clarissa is rewarded in missing such a man as Lovelace. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-333" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-334" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-15.xhtml#noteref-334" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-335" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Rev <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Norris, of Bremerton. <a href="chapter-8-16.xhtml#noteref-335" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-336" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Madam Maintenon was reported to have prevailed upon Lewis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> of France, in his old age, (sunk, as he was, by ill success in the field,) to marry her, by way of compounding with his conscience for the freedoms of his past life, to which she attributed his public losses. <a href="chapter-8-19.xhtml#noteref-336" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-337" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This man came from her cousin Morden; as will be seen hereafter, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LII</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-23.xhtml#noteref-337" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-338" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-23.xhtml#noteref-338" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-339" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Explained in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-23.xhtml#noteref-339" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-340" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The stiff visit this good divine was prevailed upon to make her, as mentioned in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span> (of which, however, she was too generous to remind him) might warrant the lady to think that he had rather inclined to their party, as to the <em>parental side</em>, than to hers. <a href="chapter-8-25.xhtml#noteref-340" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-341" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-26.xhtml#noteref-341" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-342" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-26.xhtml#noteref-342" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-343" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Her letter, containing the reasons she refers to, was not asked for; and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lewen’s death, which fell out soon after he had received it, was the reason that it was not communicated to the family, till it was too late to do the service that might have been hoped for from it. <a href="chapter-8-27.xhtml#noteref-343" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-344" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-28.xhtml#noteref-344" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-345" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-28.xhtml#noteref-345" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-346" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The former housekeeper at Harlowe-place. <a href="chapter-8-29.xhtml#noteref-346" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-347" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-31.xhtml#noteref-347" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-348" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford has not yet sent him his last-written letter. His reason for which see Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-36.xhtml#noteref-348" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-349" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-37.xhtml#noteref-349" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-350" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span>. <a href="chapter-8-39.xhtml#noteref-350" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-351" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Otway’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Orphan</i>. <a href="chapter-8-39.xhtml#noteref-351" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-352" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVIII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-40.xhtml#noteref-352" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-353" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-40.xhtml#noteref-353" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-354" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXVI</span>. <a href="chapter-8-40.xhtml#noteref-354" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-355" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXIX</span>. <a href="chapter-8-40.xhtml#noteref-355" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-356" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXIX</span>. <a href="chapter-8-40.xhtml#noteref-356" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-357" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXI</span>. <a href="chapter-8-40.xhtml#noteref-357" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-358" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXI</span>. <a href="chapter-8-41.xhtml#noteref-358" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-359" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Windmill, near Slough. <a href="chapter-8-42.xhtml#noteref-359" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-360" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-42.xhtml#noteref-360" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-361" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-42.xhtml#noteref-361" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-362" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXI</span>. <a href="chapter-8-42.xhtml#noteref-362" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-363" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-46.xhtml#noteref-363" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-364" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It may not be amiss to observe, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford’s solicitude to get back his letters was owing to his desire of fulfilling the lady’s wishes that he would furnish Miss Howe with materials to vindicate her memory. <a href="chapter-8-49.xhtml#noteref-364" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-365" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-52.xhtml#noteref-365" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-366" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-52.xhtml#noteref-366" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-367" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <a href="chapter-8-52.xhtml#noteref-367" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-368" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-53.xhtml#noteref-368" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-369" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXIX</span>. <a href="chapter-8-53.xhtml#noteref-369" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-370" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-53.xhtml#noteref-370" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-371" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These are the lines the lady refers to:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>From death we rose to life: ’tis but the same,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Through life to pass again from whence we came.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With shame we see our <strong>passions</strong> can prevail,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where <em>reason</em>, <em>certainty</em>, and <em>virtue</em> fail.</span>
							<br/>
							<span><strong>Honour</strong>, that empty name, can death despise;</span>
							<br/>
							<span><strong>Scorn’d Love</strong> to death, as to a <em>refuge</em>, flies;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And <strong>Sorrow</strong> waits for death with longing eyes.</span>
							<br/>
							<span><strong>Hope</strong> triumphs o’er the thoughts of death; and <strong>Fate</strong></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cheats fools, and flatters the unfortunate.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We fear to lose, what a <em>small time</em> must waste,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Till life itself grows the <em>disease</em> at last.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Begging for life, we beg for <em>more decay</em>,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And to be <em>long a dying</em> only pray.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-8-55.xhtml#noteref-371" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-372" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meaning his meditated second violence (See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span>.) and his succeeding letters to her, supplicating for her pardon. <a href="chapter-8-55.xhtml#noteref-372" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-373" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXIX</span>. <a href="chapter-8-56.xhtml#noteref-373" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-374" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-56.xhtml#noteref-374" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-375" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-56.xhtml#noteref-375" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-376" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-56.xhtml#noteref-376" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-377" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-57.xhtml#noteref-377" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-378" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Begun on Monday <time datetime="09-04"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 4</time>, and by piecemeal finished on Tuesday; but not sent till the Thursday following. <a href="chapter-8-62.xhtml#noteref-378" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-379" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr><abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr></abbr> At the time this Letter was written. <a href="chapter-8-65.xhtml#noteref-379" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-380" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Joy</em>, let me here observe, my dear Sir, by way of note, is not absolutely inconsistent with <em>melancholy</em>; a <em>soft gentle joy</em>, not a <em>rapid</em>, not a <em>rampant joy</em>, however; but such a <em>joy</em>, as shall lift her <em>temporarily</em> out of her <em>soothing melancholy</em>, and then <em>let her down gently</em> into it again; for <em>melancholy</em>, to be sure, her <em>reflection</em> will generally make to be her state. <a href="chapter-8-66.xhtml#noteref-380" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-381" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>And here, by way of note, permit me to say, that no <em>sermon</em> I ever composed cost me half the <em>pains</em> that this letter hath done⁠—but I knew your great <em>appetite</em> after, as well as <em>admiration</em> of, the <em>ancient wisdom</em>, which you so justly prefer to the <em>modern</em>⁠—and indeed I join with you to think, that the <em>modern</em> is only <em>borrowed</em>, (as the <em>moon</em> doth its light from the <em>sun</em>,) at least, that we <em>excel</em> them in nothing; and that our <em>best cogitations</em> may be found, generally speaking, more <em>elegantly</em> dressed and expressed by them. <a href="chapter-8-66.xhtml#noteref-381" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-382" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="chapter-9-8.xhtml#noteref-382" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-383" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXII</span>. <a href="chapter-9-8.xhtml#noteref-383" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-384" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LVII</span>. <a href="chapter-9-12.xhtml#noteref-384" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-385" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the beginning of Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-9-20.xhtml#noteref-385" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-386" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The words thus enclosed [ ] were omitted in the transcript to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. <a href="chapter-9-20.xhtml#noteref-386" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-387" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Whoever has seen Dean Swift’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Lady’s Dressing Room</i>, will think this description of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford’s not only more <em>natural</em>, but more <em>decent painting</em>, as well as better justified by the <em>design</em>, and by the use that may be made of it. <a href="chapter-9-25.xhtml#noteref-387" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-388" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Judges</span> 12:6. <a href="chapter-9-25.xhtml#noteref-388" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-389" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="chapter-9-27.xhtml#noteref-389" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-390" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the Will, in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="chapter-9-27.xhtml#noteref-390" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-391" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This letter contains in substance⁠—her thanks to the good woman for her care of her in her infancy; for her good instructions, and the excellent example she had set her; with self-accusations of a vanity and presumption, which lay lurking in her heart unknown to herself, till her calamities (obliging her to look into herself) brought them to light.</p>
					<p>She comforts her on her early death; having finished, as she says, her <em>probatory course</em>, at so early a time of life, when many are not ripened by the sunshine of Divine Grace for a better, till they are fifty, sixty, or seventy years of age.</p>
					<p>I hope, she says, that my father will grant the request I have made to him in my last will, to let you pass the remainder of your days at my <em>Dairy-house</em>, as it used to be called, where once I promised myself to be happy in you. Your discretion, prudence, and economy, my dear, good woman, proceeds she, will male your presiding over the concerns of that house as beneficial to them as it can be convenient to you. For <em>your</em> sake, my dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton, I hope they will make you this offer. And if they do, I hope you will accept it for <em>theirs</em>.</p>
					<p>She remembers herself to her foster-brother in a very kind manner; and charges her, for his sake, that she will not take too much to heart what has befallen her.</p>
					<p>She concludes as follows:</p>
					<p>Remember me, in the last place, to all my kind well-wishers of your acquaintance; and to those I used to call <em>My Poor</em>. They will be <em>God’s poor</em>, if they trust in Him. I have taken such care, that I hope they will not be losers by my death. Bid them, therefore, rejoice; and do you also, my reverend comforter and sustainer, (as well in my darker as in my fairer days,) likewise rejoice, that I am so soon delivered from the evils that were before me; and that I am <strong>now</strong>, when this comes to your hands, as I humbly trust, exulting in the mercies of a gracious God, who has conducted an end to all my temptations and distresses; and who, I most humbly trust, will, in his own good time, give us a joyful meeting in the regions of eternal blessedness. <a href="chapter-9-29.xhtml#noteref-391" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-392" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-9-31.xhtml#noteref-392" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-393" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A blank, at the writing, was left for this date, and filled up on this day. See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LI</span>. <a href="chapter-9-33.xhtml#noteref-393" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-394" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The date of the year is left blank for particular reasons. <a href="chapter-9-33.xhtml#noteref-394" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-395" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>. <a href="chapter-9-33.xhtml#noteref-395" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-396" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LV</span>. <a href="chapter-9-33.xhtml#noteref-396" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-397" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LV</span>. <a href="chapter-9-33.xhtml#noteref-397" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-398" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="chapter-9-33.xhtml#noteref-398" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-399" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Job</span> 15:31, 32, 33. <a href="chapter-9-33.xhtml#noteref-399" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-400" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LI</span>. <a href="chapter-9-33.xhtml#noteref-400" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-401" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LII</span>. <a href="chapter-9-34.xhtml#noteref-401" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-402" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-9-36.xhtml#noteref-402" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-403" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See her letter, enclosed in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s, <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LIV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>.</p>
					<p>The reader may observe, by the date of this letter, that it was written within two days of the allegorical one, to which it refers, and while the lady was labouring under the increased illness occasioned by the hurries and terrors into which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace had thrown her, in order to avoid the visit he was so earnest to make her at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith’s; so early written, perhaps, that she might not be surprised by death into a seeming breach of her word.</p>
					<p>High as her Christian spirit soars in this letter, the reader has seen, in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXIV</span> and in other places, that that exalted spirit carried her to still more divine elevations, as she drew nearer to her end. <a href="chapter-9-36.xhtml#noteref-403" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-404" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See his delirious Letter, <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>. <a href="chapter-9-37.xhtml#noteref-404" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-405" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This Letter appears not. <a href="chapter-9-37.xhtml#noteref-405" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-406" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="chapter-9-37.xhtml#noteref-406" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-407" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="chapter-9-37.xhtml#noteref-407" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-408" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span>. <a href="chapter-9-42.xhtml#noteref-408" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-409" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the Postscript to Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-9-42.xhtml#noteref-409" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-410" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="chapter-9-43.xhtml#noteref-410" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-411" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="chapter-9-47.xhtml#noteref-411" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-412" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="chapter-9-47.xhtml#noteref-412" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-413" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The preceding Letter. <a href="chapter-9-47.xhtml#noteref-413" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-414" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What is between crotchets, thus [ ], <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford omitted in the transcription of this Letter to Miss Howe. <a href="chapter-9-54.xhtml#noteref-414" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-415" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</span>. <a href="chapter-9-54.xhtml#noteref-415" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-416" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="chapter-9-55.xhtml#noteref-416" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-417" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXI</span>. <a href="chapter-9-55.xhtml#noteref-417" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-418" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-9-55.xhtml#noteref-418" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-419" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In her commonplace book she has the following note upon the recollection of this illness in the time of her distress:</p>
					<p>“In a dangerous illness, with which I was visited a few years before I had the unhappiness to know this ungrateful man! (would to Heaven I had died in it!) my bed was surrounded by my dear relations⁠—father, mother, brother, sister, my two uncles, weeping, kneeling, round me, then put up their vows to Heaven for my recovery; and I, fearing that I should drag down with me to my grave one or other of my sorrowing friends, wished and prayed to recover for <em>their</em> sakes.⁠—Alas! how shall parents in such cases know what to wish for! How happy for them, and for me, had I then been denied to their prayers! But now I am eased of that care. All those dear relations are living still⁠—but not one of them (such as they think, has been the heinousness of my error!) but, far from being grieved, would rejoice to hear of my death.” <a href="chapter-9-55.xhtml#noteref-419" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-420" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These double dates are due to the fact that the United Kingdom had not yet converted to the Gregorian calendar whereas most of Europe had done so. <cite>—Editor</cite> <a href="chapter-9-58.xhtml#noteref-420" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-421" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>. See also Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVI</span> of that volume, and many other places. <a href="chapter-9-61.xhtml#noteref-421" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-422" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>.⁠—It may be observed further, that all Clarissa’s occasional lectures to Miss Howe, on that young lady’s treatment of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman, prove that she was herself above affectation and tyranny.⁠—See, more particularly, the advice she gives to that friend of her heart, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>.⁠—“O my dear,” says she, in that Letter, “that it had been my lot (as I was not permitted to live single) to have met with a man by whom I could have acted generously and unreservedly!” <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-9-61.xhtml#noteref-422" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-423" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-9-61.xhtml#noteref-423" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-424" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-9-61.xhtml#noteref-424" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-425" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-9-61.xhtml#noteref-425" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-426" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span>. <a href="chapter-9-61.xhtml#noteref-426" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-427" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-9-61.xhtml#noteref-427" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-428" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="chapter-9-61.xhtml#noteref-428" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-429" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span>. <a href="conclusion.xhtml#noteref-429" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-430" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ecclesiasticus</span> 25:19. <a href="conclusion.xhtml#noteref-430" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-431" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLI</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LVII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="conclusion.xhtml#noteref-431" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-432" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Several worthy persons have wished, that the heinous practice of duelling had been more forcibly discouraged, by way of note, at the conclusion of a work designed to recommend the highest and most important doctrines of Christianity. It is humbly presumed, that these persons have not sufficiently attended to what is already done on that subject in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span> and in <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIV</span>, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLV</span>. <a href="conclusion.xhtml#noteref-432" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-433" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Vol. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-433" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-434" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Spectator</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-434" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-435" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Yet, in Tamerlane, two of the most amiable characters, Moneses and Arpasia, suffer death. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-435" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-436" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Spectator</i> <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 548. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-436" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-437" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A caution that our Blessed Saviour himself gives in the case of the eighteen person killed by the fall of the tower of Siloam, Luke <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>. 4. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-437" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-438" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="la">Vitiis nemo sine nascitur: optimus ille, Qui minimis urgentur</i>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-438" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-439" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rapin, on Aristotle’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poetics</i>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-439" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-440" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Psalm <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXIII</span> <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-440" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-441" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LVIII</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-441" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-442" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-442" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-443" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-443" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-444" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>And here it may not be amiss to remind the reader, that so early in the work as <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVIII</span> the dispensations of Providence are justified by herself. And thus she ends her reflections⁠—“I shall not live always⁠—may my closing scene be happy!”⁠—She had her wish. It was happy. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-444" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-445" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</span> and <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-445" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-446" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-446" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-447" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-447" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-448" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-448" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-449" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-449" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-450" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-450" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-451" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-451" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-452" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-452" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-453" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-453" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-454" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-454" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-455" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-455" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-456" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This quotation is translated from a <em>Critique</em> on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Clarissa</i>, written in French, and published at Amsterdam. The whole Critique, rendered into English, was inserted in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> of <time datetime="1749-06">June</time> and <time datetime="1749-08">August, 1749</time>. The author has done great honour in it to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Clarissa</i>; and as there are Remarks published with it, which answer several objections made to different passages in the story by that candid foreigner, the reader is referred to the aforesaid Magazine for both. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-456" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-457" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-457" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-458" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See her mother’s praises of her to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-458" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-459" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LV</span> of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="afterword.xhtml#noteref-459" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-467" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, towards the conclusion. <a href="endnotes.xhtml#noteref-467" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-468" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. <a href="endnotes.xhtml#noteref-468" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-469" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="endnotes.xhtml#noteref-469" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
