<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 385: Mr. Belford, to Robert Lovelace, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-385" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">385</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Robert Lovelace, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday Morning, <time datetime="08-03"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 3</time>. Six o’clock</p>
				</header>
				<p>I have been so much employed in my own and Belton’s affairs, that I could not come to town till last night; having contented myself with sending to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lovick, to know, from time to time, the state of the lady’s health; of which I received but very indifferent accounts, owing, in a great measure, to letters or advices brought her from her implacable family.</p>
				<p>I have now completed my own affairs; and, next week, shall go to Epsom, to endeavour to put Belton’s sister into possession of his own house for him: after which, I shall devote myself wholly to your service, and to that of the lady.</p>
				<p>I was admitted to her presence last night; and found her visibly altered for the worse. When I went home, I had your letter of Tuesday last put into my hands. Let me tell thee, Lovelace, that I insist upon the performance of thy engagement to me that thou wilt not personally molest her.</p>
				<p class="abstract">[<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford dates again on Thursday morning, ten o’clock; and gives an account of a conversation which he had just held with the Lady upon the subject of Miss Montague’s letter to her, preceding, and upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s alternatives, as mentioned in Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXV</span>, which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford supported with the utmost earnestness. But, as the result of this conversation will be found in the subsequent letters, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford’s pleas and arguments in favour of his friend, and the Lady’s answers, are omitted.]</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
