<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 509: Mr. Belford, to the Right Hon. Lord M.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-509" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">509</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford, to the Right <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Hon.</abbr> Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">London, <time datetime="09-14"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 14</time></p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">My Lord,</p>
				</header>
				<p>I am very apprehensive that the affair between <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace and the late excellent Miss Clarissa Harlowe will be attended with farther bad consequences, notwithstanding her dying injunctions to the contrary. I would, therefore, humbly propose that your Lordship, and his other relations, will forward the purpose your kinsman lately had to go abroad; where I hope he will stay till all is blown over. But as he will not stir, if he knew the true motives of your wishes, the avowed inducement, as I hinted once to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mowbray, may be such as respects his own health both of person and mind. To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mowbray and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tourville all countries are alike; and they perhaps will accompany him.</p>
				<p>I am glad to hear that he is in a way of recovery; but this the rather induces me to press the matter. I think no time should be lost.</p>
				<p>Your Lordship had heard that I have the honour to be the executor of this admirable lady’s last will. I transcribe from it the following paragraph.</p>
				<p class="abstract">[He then transcribes the article which so gratefully mentions this nobleman, and the ladies of his family, in relation to the rings she bequeaths them, about which he desires their commands.]</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
