<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 468: Mr. Brand, to Mr. John Walton</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-468" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">468</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brand, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Walton</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sat. Night, <time datetime="09-02"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 2</time></p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Walton,</p>
				</header>
				<p>I am obliged to you for the very <em>handsomely penned</em>, (and <em>elegantly written</em>) letter which you have sent me on purpose to do <em>justice</em> to the <em>character</em> of the <em>younger</em> Miss Harlowe; and yet I must tell you that I had reason, <em>before that came</em>, to <em>think</em>, (and to <em>know</em> indeed), that we were <em>all wrong</em>. And so I had employed the <em>greatest part</em> of this <em>week</em>, in drawing up an <em>apologetical letter</em> to my worthy <em>patron</em>, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Harlowe, in order to set all <em>matters right</em> between <em>me and them</em>, and, (<em>as far as I could</em>), between <em>them</em> and <em>Miss</em>. So it required little more than <em>connection</em> and <em>transcribing</em>, when I received <em>yours</em>; and it will be with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harlowe aforesaid, <em>tomorrow morning</em>; and this, and the copy of that, will be with you on <em>Monday morning</em>.</p>
				<p>You cannot imagine how sorry I am that <em>you</em> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Walton, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barker, and <em>I myself</em>, should have taken matters up so lightly, (judging, alas-a-day! by appearance and conjecture), where <em>character</em> and <em>reputation</em> are concerned. Horace says truly,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span><i xml:lang="la">Et semel emissum volat irrevocabile verbum</i>.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>That is, <em>Words one spoken cannot be recalled</em>. But, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Walton, they may be <em>contradicted</em> by <em>other</em> words; and we may confess ourselves guilty of a <em>mistake</em>, and express our <em>concern</em> for being <em>mistaken</em>; and resolve to make our <em>mistake</em> a <em>warning</em> to us for the <em>future</em>: and this is all that <em>can be done</em>, and what every <em>worthy mind will do</em>; and what nobody can be <em>readier to do</em> than <em>we four undesigning offenders</em>, (as I see by <em>your letter</em>, on <em>your part</em>, and as you will see by the <em>enclosed copy</em>, on <em>mine</em>); which, if it be received as I <em>think it ought</em>, (and as I <em>believe it will</em>), must give me a <em>speedy</em> opportunity to see you when I <em>visit the lady</em>; to whom, (as you will see in it), I expect to be sent up with the <em>olive-branch</em>.</p>
				<p>The matter in which we all <em>erred</em>, must be owned to be <em>very nice</em>; and (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford’s <em>character considered</em>) <em>appearances</em> ran very strong <em>against the lady</em>. But all that this serveth to show is, <em>that in doubtful matters, the wisest people may be mistaken</em>; for so saith the <em>Poet</em>,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<i xml:lang="la">Fallitur in dubiis hominum solertia rebus.</i>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>If you have an <em>opportunity</em>, you may (as if <em>from yourself</em>, and <em>unknown to me</em>) show the enclosed to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, who (you tell me) <em>resenteth</em> the matter very heinously; but not to let him <em>see</em> or <em>hear read</em>, those words <em>that relate to him</em>, in the paragraph at the <em>bottom of the second page</em>, beginning, (<em>But yet I do insist upon it,</em>) to the <em>end</em> of that paragraph; for one would not make one’s self <em>enemies</em>, you know; and I have <em>reason to think</em>, that this <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <em>Belford</em> is as <em>passionate</em> and <em>fierce</em> a man as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. What pity it is the lady could find no <em>worthier a protector</em>! You may paste those lines over with <em>blue</em> or <em>black paper</em>, before he seeth it: and if he insisteth upon taking a copy of my letter, (for he, or anybody that <em>seeth it</em>, or <em>heareth it read</em>, will, no doubt, be glad to have by them the copy of a letter so full of the <em>sentiments</em> of the <em>noblest writers</em> of <em>antiquity</em>, and <em>so well adapted</em>, as I will be bold to say they are, to the <em>point in hand</em>; I say, if he insisteth upon taking a copy), let him give you the <em>strongest assurances</em> not to suffer it to be <em>printed</em> on <em>any account</em>; and I make the same request to you, that <em>you</em> will not; for if anything be to be made of a <em>man</em>s works,” who, but the <em>author</em>, should have the <em>advantage</em>? And if the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Spectator</i>s, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Tatler</i>s, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Examiner</i>s, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Guardian</i>s, and other of our polite papers, make such a <em>strutting</em> with a <em>single verse</em>, or so by way of <em>motto</em>, in the <em>front</em> of <em>each day’s paper; and if other authors</em> pride themselves in <em>finding out</em> and <em>embellishing</em> the <em>title-pages</em> of their <em>books</em> with a <em>verse</em> or <em>adage</em> from the <em>classical writers</em>; what a figure would <em>such a letter as the enclosed make</em>, so full fraught with <em>admirable precepts</em>, and <em>apropos quotations</em>, from the <em>best authority</em>?</p>
				<p>I have been told that a <em>certain noble Lord</em>, who once sat himself down to write a <em>pamphlet</em> in behalf of a <em>great minister</em>, after taking <em>infinite pains</em> to <em>no purpose</em> to find a <em>Latin motto</em>, gave commission to a friend of <em>his</em> to offer to <em>anyone</em>, who could help him to a <em>suitable one</em>, but of one or two lines, a <em>hamper of claret</em>. Accordingly, his lordship had a <em>motto found him</em> from <em>Juvenal</em>, which he <em>unhappily mistaking</em>, (not knowing <em>Juvenal</em> was a <em>poet</em>), printed as a prose <em>sentence</em> in his <em>title-page</em>.</p>
				<p>If, then, <em>one</em> or <em>two</em> lines were of so much worth, (A <em>hamper of claret</em>! No <em>less</em>!) of what <em>inestimable value</em> would <em>such a letter as mine</em> be deemed?⁠—And who knoweth but that this noble P⁠⸺⁠r, (who is now<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-379" id="noteref-379" epub:type="noteref">379</a> living), if he should happen to see <em>this letter</em> shining with such a <em>glorious string of jewels</em>, might give the <em>writer a scarf</em>, in order to have him <em>always at hand</em>, or be a <em>mean</em> (some way or other) to bring him into <em>notice</em>? And I would be bold to say (<em>bad</em> as the <em>world</em> is) a man of <em>sound learning</em> wanteth nothing but an <em>initiation</em> to make his <em>fortune</em>.</p>
				<p>I hope, my good friend, that the lady will not <em>die</em>: I shall be much <em>grieved</em>, if she doth; and the more because of mine <em>unhappy misrepresentation</em>: so will <em>you</em> for the <em>same cause</em>; so will her <em>parents</em> and <em>friends</em>. They are very <em>rich</em> and <em>very worthy</em> gentlefolks.</p>
				<p>But let me tell you, <em>by the by</em>, that they had carried the matter against her <em>so far</em>, that I believe in my heart they were glad to <em>justify themselves</em> by <em>my report</em>; and would have been <em>less pleased</em>, had I made a <em>more favourable one</em>. And yet in <em>their hearts</em> they <em>dote</em> upon her. But now they are all (as I hear) inclined to be <em>friends with her</em>, and <em>forgive her</em>; her <em>brother</em>, as well as <em>the rest</em>.</p>
				<p>But their <em>cousin</em>, <abbr>Col.</abbr> Morden, <em>a very fine gentleman</em>, had had such <em>high words</em> with them, and they with him, that they know not how to <em>stoop</em>, lest it should look like being frighted into an <em>accommodation</em>. Hence it is, that <em>I</em> have taken the greater liberty to <em>press the reconciliation</em>; and I hope in <em>such good season</em>, that they will all be <em>pleased</em> with it: for can they have a <em>better handle</em> to save their <em>pride</em> all round, than by my <em>mediation</em>? And let me tell you, (<i xml:lang="la">inter nos</i>, <em>betwixt ourselves</em>), <em>very proud they all are</em>.</p>
				<p>By this <em>honest means</em>, (for by <em>dishonest ones</em> I would not be <em>Archbishop of Canterbury</em>), I hope to please everybody; to be <em>forgiven</em>, in the <em>first place</em>, by <em>the lady</em>, (whom, being a <em>lover of learning</em> and <em>learned men</em>, I shall have great <em>opportunities</em> of <em>obliging</em>; for, when she departed from her father’s house, I had but just the honour of her <em>notice</em>, and she seemed <em>highly pleased</em> with my <em>conversation</em>); and, <em>next</em> to be <em>thanked</em> and <em>respected</em> by her <em>parents</em>, and <em>all her family</em>; as I am (I bless God for it) by my <em>dear friend</em> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Harlowe: who indeed is a man that professeth a <em>great esteem</em> for <em>men of erudition</em>; and who (with <em>singular delight</em>, I know) will run over with me the <em>authorities</em> I have <em>quoted</em>, and <em>wonder</em> at my <em>memory</em>, and the <em>happy knack</em> I have of recommending <em>mine own sense of things</em> in the words of the <em>greatest sages of antiquity</em>.</p>
				<p>Excuse me, my good friend, for this <em>seeming vanity</em>. The great Cicero (you must have heard, I suppose) had a <em>much greater</em> spice of it, and wrote a <em>long letter begging</em> and <em>praying</em> to be <em>flattered</em>. But if I say <em>less of myself</em> than other people (who know me) <em>say of me</em>, I think I keep a <em>medium</em> between <em>vanity</em> and <em>false modesty</em>; the latter of which oftentimes gives itself the <em>lie</em>, when it is <em>declaring of</em> the <em>compliments</em>, that <em>everybody</em> gives it as its due: an hypocrisy, as well as folly, that, (I hope), I shall forever scorn to be guilty of.</p>
				<p>I have <em>another reason</em> (as I may tell to you, my <em>old schoolfellow</em>) to make me wish for this <em>fine lady’s</em> recovery and <em>health</em>; and that is, (by some distant intimations), I have heard from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Harlowe, that it is <em>very likely</em> (because of the <em>slur</em> she hath received) that she will choose to <em>live privately</em> and <em>penitently</em>⁠—and will probably (when she cometh into her <em>estate</em>) keep a <em>chaplain</em> to direct her in her <em>devotions</em> and <em>penitence</em>⁠—If she doth, who can stand a <em>better chance</em> than <em>myself</em>?⁠—And as I find (by <em>your</em> account, as well as by <em>everybody’s</em>) that she is innocent as to <em>intention</em>, and is resolved never to think of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <em>Lovelace more</em>, who knoweth <em>what</em> (in time) <em>may happen</em>?⁠—And yet it must be after <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <em>Lovelace’s</em> death, (which may possibly sooner happen than he <em>thinketh</em> of, by means of his <em>detestable courses</em>): for, after all, a man who is of <em>public utility</em>, ought not (for the <em>finest woman</em> in the world) to lay his <em>throat</em> at the <em>mercy</em> of a man who boggleth at nothing.</p>
				<p>I beseech you, let not this hint <em>go farther</em> than to <em>yourself</em>, your <em>spouse</em>, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <em>Barker</em>. I know I may trust my <em>life</em> in <em>your hands</em> and <em>theirs</em>. There have been (let me tell ye) <em>unlikelier</em> things come to pass, and that with <em>rich widows</em>, (some of <em>quality</em> truly!) whose choice, in their <em>first marriages</em> hath (perhaps) been guided by <em>motives of convenience</em>, or <em>mere corporalities</em>, as I may say; but who by their <em>second</em> have had for their view the <em>corporal</em> and <em>spiritual</em> mingled; which is the most eligible (no doubt) to <em>substance</em> composed <em>of both</em>, as <em>men</em> and <em>women</em> are.</p>
				<p>Nor think (Sir) that, should such a thing come to pass, <em>either</em> would be <em>disgraced</em>, since <em>the lady</em> in <em>me</em> would marry a <em>gentleman</em> and a <em>scholar</em>: and as to <em>mine own honour</em>, as the <em>slur</em> would bring her <em>high fortunes</em> down to an <em>equivalence</em> with my <em>mean ones</em>, (if <em>fortune</em> only, and not <em>merit</em>, be considered), so hath not the <em>life</em> of <em>this lady</em> been <em>so tainted</em>, (either by <em>length of time</em>, or <em>naughtiness of practice</em>), as to put her on a <em>foot</em> with the <em>cast Abigails</em>, that too, too often, (God knoweth), are thought good enough for a <em>young clergyman</em>, who, perhaps, is drawn in by a <em>poor benefice</em>; and (if the <em>wicked one</em> be not <em>quite worn out</em>) groweth poorer and poorer upon it, by an <em>increase of family</em> he knoweth not whether <em>is most his</em>, or his <em>noble</em>, (<em>ignoble</em>, I should say), <em>patrons</em>.</p>
				<p>But, all this <em>apart</em>, and <em>in confidence</em>.</p>
				<p>I know you made at school but a small progress in <em>languages</em>. So I have restrained myself from <em>many illustrations</em> from the <em>classics</em>, that I could have filled this letter with, (as I have done the enclosed one): and, being at a <em>distance</em>, I cannot <em>explain</em> them to you, as I <em>do to my friend</em>, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Harlowe; and who, (after all), is obliged to <em>me</em> for pointing out to <em>him</em> many <em>beauties</em> of the <em>authors I quote</em>, which otherwise would lie concealed from <em>him</em>, as they must from every <em>common observer</em>.⁠—But this (too) <i xml:lang="la">inter nos</i>⁠—for he would not take it well to <em>have it known</em>⁠—<em>Jays</em> (you know, old schoolfellow, <em>jays</em>, you know) <em>will strut in peacock’s</em> feathers.</p>
				<p>But whither am I running? I never know where to end, when I get upon <em>learned topics</em>. And albeit I cannot compliment <em>you</em> with the <em>name of a learned man</em>, yet are you <em>a sensible man</em>; and (<em>as such</em>) must have <em>pleasure</em> in <em>learned men</em>, and in <em>their writings</em>.</p>
				<p>In this confidence, (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Walton), with my <em>kind respects</em> to the good ladies, (your <em>spouse</em> and <em>sister</em>), and in hopes, for the <em>young lady’s</em>s sake, soon to follow this long, long epistle, in <em>person</em>, I conclude myself,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your loving and faithful friend,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Elias Brand.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:postscript">You will perhaps, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Walton, wonder at the meaning of the <em>lines drawn under many of the words and sentences</em>, (<b>underscoring</b> we call it); and were my letters to be printed, those would be put in a <em>different character</em>. Now, you must know, Sir, that <em>we learned men</em> do this to point out to the readers, who are not <em>so learned</em>, where the <em>jet of our arguments lieth</em>, and the <em>emphasis</em> they are to lay upon <em>those words</em>; whereby they will take in readily our <em>sense</em> and <em>cogency</em>. Some <em>pragmatical</em> people have said, that an author who doth a <em>great deal of this</em>, either calleth his readers <em>fools</em>, or tacitly condemneth <em>his own style</em>, as supposing his meaning would be <em>dark</em> without it, or that all of his <em>force</em> lay in <em>words</em>. But all of those with whom I have conversed in a learned way, <em>think as I think</em>. And to give a very <em>pretty</em>, though <em>familiar illustration</em>, I have considered a page distinguished by <em>different characters</em>, as a <em>verdant field</em> overspread with <em>butter-flowers</em> and <em>daisies</em>, and other summer-flowers. These the poets liken to <em>enamelling</em>⁠—have you not read in the poets of <em>enamelled meads</em>, and so forth?</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
