<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 93: Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-93" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">93</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday, Nine o’clock</p>
				</header>
				<p>I write, because you enjoin me to do so. Love you still!⁠—How can I help it, if I would? You may believe how I stand aghast, your letter communicating the first news⁠—Good God of Heaven and Earth!⁠—But what shall I say?⁠—I am all impatient for particulars.</p>
				<p>Lord have mercy upon me!⁠—But can it be?</p>
				<p>My mother will <em>indeed</em> be astonished!⁠—How can I tell it her!⁠—It was but last night (upon some jealousies put into her head by your foolish uncle) that I assured her, and this upon the strength of your <em>own</em> assurances, that neither man nor devil would be able to induce you to take a step that was in the least derogatory to the most punctilious honour.</p>
				<p>But, once more, can it be? What woman at this rate!⁠—But, God preserve you!</p>
				<p>Let nothing escape you in your letters. Direct them for me, however, to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knolly’s, till further notice.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Observe, my dear, that I don’t blame <em>you</em> by all this⁠—Your relations only are in fault!⁠—Yet how you came to change your mind is the surprising thing.</p>
				<p>How to break it to my mother, I know not. Yet if she hear it first from any other, and find I knew it before, she will believe it to be my connivance!⁠—Yet, as I hope to live, I know not how to break it to her.</p>
				<p>But this is teasing you.⁠—I am sure, without intention.</p>
				<p>Let me now repeat my former advice⁠—If you are <em>not</em> married by this time, be sure delay not the ceremony. Since things are as they are, I wish it were thought that you were privately married before you went away. If these men plead <strong>authority</strong> to our pain, when we are <em>theirs</em>⁠—Why should we not, in such a case as <em>this</em>, make some good out of the hated word, for our reputation, when we are induced to violate a more natural one?</p>
				<p>Your brother and sister (that vexes me almost as much as anything!) have now their ends. Now, I suppose, will go forward alterations of wills, and suchlike spiteful doings.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Miss Lloyd and Miss Biddulph this moment send up their names. They are out of breath, Kitty says, to speak to me⁠—easy to guess their errand;⁠—I must see my mother, before I see them. I have no way but to show her your letter to clear myself. I shall not be able to say a word, till she has run herself out of her first breath.⁠—Forgive me, my dear⁠—surprise makes me write thus. If your messenger did not wait, and were not those young ladies below, I could write it over again, for fear of afflicting you.</p>
				<p>I send what you write for. If there be anything else you want that is in my power, command without reserve</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your ever affectionate</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Anna Howe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
