<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 289: To Mr. Patrick M‘Donald</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-289" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">289</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Patrick M‘Donald</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p class="letter-header">To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Patrick M‘Donald, at His Lodgings, at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brown’s, Peruke-maker, in <abbr>St.</abbr> Martin’s Lane</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Westminster <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Hall, <abbr>Wedn.</abbr> Morning, Two o’clock</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear M‘Donald,</p>
				</header>
				<p>The bearer of this has a letter to carry to the lady.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-259" id="noteref-259" epub:type="noteref">259</a> I have been at the trouble of writing a copy of it: which I enclose, that you may not mistake your cue.</p>
				<p>You will judge of my reasons for antedating the enclosed sealed one,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-260" id="noteref-260" epub:type="noteref">260</a> directed to you by the name of Tomlinson; which you are to show to the lady, as in confidence. You will open it of course.</p>
				<p>I doubt not your dexterity and management, dear M‘Donald; nor your zeal; especially as the hope of cohabitation must now be given up. Impossible to be carried is that scheme. I might break her heart, but not incline her will⁠—am in earnest therefore to marry her, if she let not the day slip.</p>
				<p>Improve upon the hint of her mother. That may touch her. But John Harlowe, <em>remember</em>, has <em>privately</em> engaged that lady⁠—<em>privately</em>, I say; else, (not to mention the reason for her uncle Harlowe’s former expedient), you know, she might find means to get a letter away to the one or to the other, to know the truth; or to Miss Howe, to engage her to inquire into it: and, if she should, the word <em>privately</em> will account for the uncle’s and mother’s denying it.</p>
				<p>However, fail not, as from me, to charge our mother and her nymphs to redouble their vigilance both as to her person and letters. All’s upon a crisis now. But she must not be treated ill neither.</p>
				<p>Thursday over, I shall know what to resolve upon.</p>
				<p>If necessary, you must assume authority. The devil’s in’t, if such a girl as this shall awe a man of your years and experience. You are not in love with her as I am. Fly out, if she doubt your honour. Spirits <em>naturally</em> soft may be beat out of their play and borne down (though ever so much raised) by higher anger. All women are cowards at bottom; only violent where they <em>may</em>. I have often stormed a girl out of her mistrust, and made her yield (before she knew where she was) to the point indignantly <em>mistrusted</em>; and that to make up with me, though I was the aggressor.</p>
				<p>If this matter succeed as I’d have it, (or if <em>not</em>, and do not fail by your fault), I will take you off the necessity of pursuing your cursed smuggling; which otherwise may one day end fatally for you.</p>
				<p>We are none of us perfect, M‘Donald. This sweet lady makes me serious sometimes in spite of my heart. But as private vices are less blamable than public; an as I think <em>smuggling</em> (as it is called) a national evil; I have no doubt to pronounce you a much worse man than myself, and as such shall take pleasure in reforming you.</p>
				<p>I send you enclosed ten guineas, as a small earnest of further favours. Hitherto you have been a very clever fellow.</p>
				<p>As to clothes for Thursday, Monmouth-street will afford a ready supply. Clothes quite new would make your condition suspected. But you may defer that care, till you see if she can be prevailed upon. Your riding-dress will do for the first visit. Nor let your boots be over clean. I have always told you the consequence of attending to the minutiae, where art (or <em>imposture</em>, as the ill-mannered would call it) is designed⁠—your linen rumpled and soily, when you wait upon her⁠—easy terms these⁠—just come to town⁠—remember (as formerly) to loll, to throw out your legs, to stroke and grasp down your ruffles, as if of significance enough to be careless. What though the presence of a fine lady would require a different behaviour, are you not of years to dispense with politeness? You can have no design upon her, you know. You are a father yourself of daughters as old as she. Evermore is <em>parade</em> and <em>obsequiousness</em> suspectable: it must show either a foolish head, or a knavish heart. Assume airs of <em>consequence</em> therefore; and you will be treated as a <em>man</em> of consequence. I have often more than half ruined myself by my complaisance; and, being afraid of control, have brought control upon myself.</p>
				<p>I think I have no more to say at present. I intend to be at Slough, or on the way to it, as by mine to the lady. Adieu, honest M‘Donald.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">
						<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. L.</abbr>
					</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
