<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 424: Mr. Belford, to Robert Lovelace, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-424" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">424</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Robert Lovelace, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Wednesday, Three o’clock</p>
				</header>
				<p>I will proceed where I left off in my last.</p>
				<p>As soon as I had seen Mowbray mounted, I went to attend upon poor Belton; whom I found in dreadful agonies, in which he awoke, after he generally does.</p>
				<p>The doctor came in presently after, and I was concerned at the scene that passed between them.</p>
				<p>It opened with the dying man’s asking him, with melancholy earnestness, if nothing⁠—if nothing at all could be done for him?</p>
				<p>The doctor shook his head, and told him, he doubted not.</p>
				<p>I <em>cannot</em> die, said the poor man⁠—I cannot <em>think</em> of dying. I am very desirous of living a little longer, if I could but be free from these horrible pains in my stomach and head. Can you give me nothing to make me pass one week⁠—but <em>one</em> week, in tolerable ease, that I may die like a man, if I <em>must</em> die!</p>
				<p>But, Doctor, I am <em>yet</em> a young man; in the prime of my years⁠—youth is a good subject for a physician to work upon⁠—Can you do nothing⁠—nothing <em>at all</em> for me, Doctor?</p>
				<p>Alas! Sir, replied his physician, you have been long in a bad way. I fear, I fear, nothing in physic can help you!</p>
				<p>He was then out of all patience: What, then, is your art, Sir?⁠—I have been a passive machine for a whole twelvemonth, to be wrought upon at the pleasure of you people of the faculty.⁠—I verily believe, had I not taken such doses of nasty stuff, I had been now a well man⁠—But who the plague would regard physicians, whose art is to cheat us with hopes while they help to destroy us?⁠—And who, not one of you, know anything but by guess?</p>
				<p>Sir, continued he, fiercely, (and with more strength of voice and coherence, than he had shown for several hours before), if you give <em>me</em> over, I give <em>you</em> over.⁠—The only honest and certain part of the art of healing is surgery. A good surgeon is worth a thousand of you. I have been in surgeons’ hands often, and have always found reason to depend upon their skill; but <em>your</em> art, Sir, what is it?⁠—but to daub, daub, daub; load, load, load; plaster, plaster, plaster; till ye utterly destroy the appetite first, and the constitution afterwards, which you are called in to help. I had a companion once, my dear Belford, thou knewest honest Blomer, as pretty a physician he would have made as any in England, had he kept himself from excess in wine and women; and he always used to say, there was nothing at all but the pickpocket parade in the physician’s art; and that the best guesser was the best physician. And I used to believe him too⁠—and yet, fond of life, and fearful of death, what do we do, when we are taken ill, but call <em>ye</em> in? And what do <em>ye</em> do, when called in, but nurse our distempers, till from pygmies you make giants of them? and then ye come creeping with solemn faces, when ye are ashamed to prescribe, or when the stomach won’t bear its natural food, by reason of your poisonous potions⁠—<em>Alas, I am afraid physic can do no more for him!</em>⁠—Nor need it, when it has brought to the brink of the grave the poor wretch who placed all his reliance in your cursed slops, and the flattering hopes you gave him.</p>
				<p>The doctor was out of countenance; but said, if we could make mortal men <em>immortal</em>, and <em>would not</em>, all this might be just.</p>
				<p>I blamed the poor man; yet excused him to the physician. To die, dear Doctor, when, like my poor friend, we are so desirous of life, is a melancholy thing. We are apt to hope too much, not considering that the seeds of death are sown in us when we begin to live, and grow up, till, like rampant weeds, they choke the tender flower of life; which declines in us as those weeds flourish. We ought, therefore, to begin early to study what our constitutions will bear, in order to root out, by temperance, the weeds which the soil is most apt to produce; or, at least, to keep them down as they rise; and not, when the flower or plant is withered at the root, and the weed in its full vigour, expect, that the medical art will restore the one, or destroy the other; when that other, as I hinted, has been rooting itself in the habit from the time of our birth.</p>
				<p>This speech, Bob, thou wilt call a <em>prettiness</em>; but the allegory is just; and thou hast not quite cured me of the metaphorical.</p>
				<p>Very true, said the doctor; you have brought a good metaphor to illustrate the thing. I am sorry I can do nothing for the gentleman; and can only recommend patience, and a better frame of mind.</p>
				<p>Well, Sir, said the poor angry man, vexed at the doctor, but more at death, you will perhaps recommend the next succession to the physician, when <em>he</em> can do no more; and, I suppose, will send your brother to pray by me for those virtues which you wish me.</p>
				<p>It seems the physician’s brother is a clergyman in the neighbourhood.</p>
				<p>I was greatly concerned to see the gentleman thus treated; and so I told poor Belton when he was gone; but he continued impatient, and would not be denied, he said, the liberty of talking to a man, who had taken so many guineas of him for doing nothing, or worse than nothing, and never declined one, though he know all the time he could do him no good.</p>
				<p>It seems the gentleman, though rich, is noted for being greedy after fees! and poor Belton went on raving at the extravagant fees of English physicians, compared with those of the most eminent foreign ones. But, poor man! he, like the Turks, who judge of a general by his success, (out of patience to think he must die), would have worshipped the doctor, and not grudged three times the sum, could he have given him hopes of recovery.</p>
				<p>But, nevertheless, I must needs say, that gentlemen of the faculty should be more moderate in their fees, or take more pains to deserve them; for, generally, they only come into a room, feel the sick man’s pulse, ask the nurse a few questions, inspect the patient’s tongue, and, perhaps, his water; then sit down, look plaguey wise, and <em>write</em>. The golden fee finds the ready hand, and they hurry away, as if the sick man’s room were infectious. So to the next they troll, and to the next, if men of great practice; valuing themselves upon the number of visits they make in a morning, and the little time they make them in. They go to dinner and unload their pockets; and sally out again to refill them. And thus, in a little time, they raise vast estates; for, as Ratcliffe said, when first told of a great loss which befell him, It was only going up and down one hundred pairs of stairs to fetch it up.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sambre (Belton’s sister) had several times proposed to him a minister to pray by him, but the poor man could not, he said, bear the thoughts of one; for that he should certainly die in an hour or two after; and he was willing to hope still, against all probability, that he might recover; and was often asking his sister if she had not seen people as bad as he was, who, almost to a miracle, when everybody gave them over, had got up again?</p>
				<p>She, shaking her head, told him she had; but, once saying, that <em>their</em> disorders were of an acute kind, and such as had a crisis in them, he called her <em>Small-hopes</em>, and <em>Job’s comforter</em>; and bid her say <em>nothing</em>, if she could not say more to the purpose, and what was <em>fitter</em> for a sick man to hear. And yet, poor fellow, he has no hopes himself, as is plain by his desponding terrors; one of which he fell into, and a very dreadful one, soon after the doctor went.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Wednesday, Nine o’clock at Night.</p>
				<p>The poor man has been in convulsions, terrible convulsions! for an hour past. O Lord! Lovelace, death is a shocking thing! by my faith it is!⁠—I wish thou wert present on this occasion. It is not merely the concern a man has for his friend; but, as death is the common lot, we see, in <em>his</em> agonies, how it will be one day with ourselves. I am all over as if cold water were poured down my back, or as if I had a strong ague-fit upon me. I was obliged to come away. And I write, hardly knowing what.⁠—I wish <em>thou</em> wert here.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Though I left him, because I could stay no longer, I can’t be easy by myself, but must go to him again.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Eleven o’clock.</p>
				<p>Poor Belton!⁠—Drawing on apace! Yet was he sensible when I went in⁠—too sensible, poor man! He has something upon his mind to reveal, he tells me, that is the worst action of his life; worse than ever you or I knew of him, he says. It <em>must</em> then be very bad!</p>
				<p>He ordered everybody out; but was seized with another convulsion-fit, before he could reveal it; and in it he lies struggling between life and death⁠—but I’ll go in again.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">One o’clock in the Morning.</p>
				<p>All now must soon be over with him: Poor, poor fellow! He has given me some hints of what he wanted to say; but all incoherent, interrupted by dying hiccups and convulsions.</p>
				<p>Bad enough it must be, Heaven knows, by what I can gather!⁠—Alas! Lovelace, I fear, I fear, he came <em>too soon</em> into his uncle’s estate.</p>
				<p>If a man were to live always, he might have some temptation to do base things, in order to procure to himself, as it would then be, <em>everlasting</em> ease, plenty, or affluence; but, for the sake of ten, twenty, thirty years of poor life to be a villain⁠—Can that be worth while? with a conscience stinging him all the time too! And when he comes to wind up all, such agonizing reflections upon his past guilt! All then appearing as nothing! What he most valued, most disgustful! and not one thing to think of, as the poor fellow says twenty and twenty times over, but what is attended with anguish and reproach!⁠—</p>
				<p>To hear the poor man wish he had never been born!⁠—To hear him pray to be nothing after death! Good God! how shocking!</p>
				<p>By his incoherent hints, I am afraid ’tis very bad with him. No pardon, no mercy, he repeats, can lie for him!</p>
				<p>I hope I shall make a proper use of this lesson. Laugh at me if thou wilt; but never, never more, will I take the liberties I have taken; but whenever I am tempted, will think of Belton’s dying agonies, and what my own may be.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, Three in the Morning.</p>
				<p>He is now at the last gasp⁠—rattles in the throat⁠—has a new convulsion every minute almost! What horror is he in! His eyes look like breath-stained glass! They roll ghastly no more; are quite set; his face distorted, and drawn out, by his sinking jaws, and erected staring eyebrows, with his lengthened furrowed forehead, to double its usual length, as it seems. It is not, it cannot be the face of Belton, thy Belton, and my Belton, whom we have beheld with so much delight over the social bottle, comparing notes, that one day may be brought against us, and make us groan, as they very lately did <em>him</em>⁠—that is to say, while he had strength to groan; for now his voice is not to be heard; all inward, lost; not so much as speaking by his eyes; yet, strange! how can it be? the bed rocking under him like a cradle.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Four o’clock.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Alas: he’s gone! that groan, that <em>dreadful</em> groan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was the last farewell of the parting mind!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The struggling soul has bid a long adieu</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To its late mansion⁠—Fled! Ah! whither fled?</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Now is all indeed over!⁠—Poor, poor Belton! by this time thou knowest if thy crimes were above the size of God’s mercies! Now are everyone’s cares and attendance at an end! now do we, thy friends⁠—poor Belton!⁠—know the worst of thee, as to this life! Thou art released from insufferable tortures both of body and mind! may those tortures, and thy repentance, expiate for thy offences, and mayest thou be happy to all eternity!</p>
				<p>We are told, that God desires not the death, the <em>spiritual</em> death of a sinner: And ’tis certain, that thou didst deeply repent! I hope, therefore, as thou wert not cut off in the midst of thy sins by the sword of injured friendship, which more than once thou hadst braved, (the dreadfullest of all deaths, next to suicide, because it gives no opportunity for repentance) that this is a merciful earnest that thy penitence is accepted; and that thy long illness, and dreadful agonies in the last stages of it, were thy only punishment.</p>
				<p>I wish indeed, I <em>heartily</em> wish, we could have seen one ray of comfort darting in upon his benighted mind, before he departed. But all, alas! to the very last gasp, was horror and confusion. And my only fear arises from this, that, till within the four last days of his life, he could not be brought to think he should die, though in a visible decline for months; and, in that presumption, was too little inclined to set about a serious preparation for a journey, which he hoped he should not be obliged to take; and when he began to apprehend that he could not put it off, his impatience, and terror, and apprehension, showed too little of that reliance and resignation, which afford the most comfortable reflections to the <em>friends</em> of the dying, as well as to the <em>dying</em> themselves.</p>
				<p>But we must leave poor Belton to that mercy, of which we have all so much need; and, for my own part (do you, Lovelace, and the rest of the fraternity, as ye will) I am resolved, I will endeavour to begin to repent of my follies while my health is sound, my intellects untouched, and while it is in my power to make some atonement, as near to restitution or reparation, as is possible, to those I have wronged or misled. And do ye <em>outwardly</em>, and from a point of <em>false bravery</em>, make as light as ye will of my resolution, as ye are none of ye of the class of abandoned and stupid sots who endeavour to disbelieve the future existence of which ye are afraid, I am sure you will justify me in your <em>hearts</em>, if not by your <em>practices</em>; and one day you will wish you had joined with me in the same resolution, and will confess there is more good sense in it, than now perhaps you will own.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Seven o’clock, Thursday Morning.</p>
				<p>You are very earnest, by your last letter, (just given me) to hear again from me, before you set out for <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:place">Berks.</abbr> I will therefore close with a few words upon the <em>only</em> subject in your letter which I can at present touch upon: and this is the letter of which you give me a copy from the lady.</p>
				<p>Want of rest, and the sad scene I have before my eyes, have rendered me altogether incapable of accounting for the contents of it in any shape. You are in ecstacies upon it. You have reason to be so, if it be as you think. Nor would I rob you of your joy: but I must say I am amazed at it.</p>
				<p>Surely, Lovelace, this surprising letter cannot be a forgery of thy own, in order to carry on some view, and to impose upon me. Yet, by the style of it, it cannot though thou art a perfect Proteus too.</p>
				<p>I will not, however, add another word, after I have desired the return of this, and have told you that I am</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your true friend, and well-wisher,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Belford.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
