<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 130: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-130" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">130</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, <time datetime="04-20">April 20</time></p>
				</header>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s servant is already returned with an answer from his friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Doleman, who has taken pains in his inquiries, and is very particular. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace brought me the letter as soon as he had read it: and as he now knows that I acquaint you with everything that he offers, I desired him to let me send it to you for your perusal. Be pleased to return it by the first opportunity. You will see by it, that his friends in town have a notion that we are actually married.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p class="letter-header">To <span epub:type="z3998:recipient">Robert Lovelace, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></span></p>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday Night, April 18.</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Sir,</p>
					</header>
					<p>I am extremely rejoiced to hear, that we shall so soon have you in town after so long an absence. You will be the more welcome still, if what report says, be true; which is, that you are <em>actually married</em> to the fair lady upon whom we have heard you make such encomiums. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Doleman, and my sister, both wish you joy if you are; and joy upon your near prospect if you are not.</p>
					<p>I have been in town for this week past, to get help if I could, from my paralytic complaints; and am in a course for them. Which, nevertheless, did not prevent me from making the desired inquiries. This is the result.</p>
					<p>You may have a first floor, well furnished, at a mercer’s in Belford-street, Covent-garden, with conveniencies for servants: and these either by the quarter or month. The terms according to the conveniences required.</p>
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Doleman has seen lodgings in Norfolk-street and others in Cecil-street; but though the prospects to the Thames and Surrey-hills look inviting from both these streets, yet I suppose they are too near the city.</p>
					<p>The owner of those in Norfolk-street would have half the house go together. It would be too much for your description therefore: and I suppose, that when you think fit to <em>declare your marriage</em>, you will hardly be in lodgings.</p>
					<p>Those in Cecil-street are neat and convenient. The owner is a widow of a good character; and she insists, that you take them for a twelvemonth certain.</p>
					<p>You may have good accommodations in Dover-street, at a widow’s, the relict of an officer in the guards, who dying soon after he had purchased his commission (to which he had a good title by service, and which cost him most part of what he had) she <q>was obliged to let lodgings</q>.</p>
					<p>This may possibly be an objection. But she is very careful, she says, that she takes no lodgers, but of <em>figure</em> and <em>reputation</em>. She rents two good houses, distant from each other, only joined by a <q>large handsome passage</q>. The <em>inner-house</em> is the genteelest, and very elegantly furnished; but you may have the use of a very handsome parlour in the <em>outer-house</em>, if you choose to look into the street.</p>
					<p>A little garden belongs to the inner-house, in which the old gentlewoman has displayed a true female fancy; having crammed it with vases, flowerpots, and figures, without number.</p>
					<p>As these lodgings seemed to me the most likely to please you, I was more particular in my inquiries about them. The apartments she has to let are in the inner-house: they are a dining-room, two neat parlours, a withdrawing-room, two or three handsome bedchambers, one with a pretty light closet in it, which looks into the little garden, all furnished in taste.</p>
					<p>A <q>dignified clergyman</q>, his <q>wife</q>, and <q>maiden daughter</q> were the last who lived in them. They have but lately quitted them, on his being presented to a considerable church preferment in Ireland. The gentlewoman says that he took the lodgings but for <q>three months</q> certain; but liked them and <q>her usage</q> so well, that he continued in them two years; and left them with regret, though on so good an account. She bragged, that this was the way of all the lodgers she ever had, who stayed with her <q>four times as long as they at first intended</q>.</p>
					<p>I had some knowledge of the colonel, who was always looked upon as a man of honour. His relict I never saw before. I think she has a <em>masculine air</em>, and is a <em>little forbidding at first</em>: but when I saw her behaviour to two agreeable <em>maiden gentlewomen</em>, her husband’s nieces, whom, for <em>that</em> reason, she calls <em>doubly</em> hers, and heard their praises of <em>her</em>, I could impute her very bulk to good humour; since we seldom see your sour peevish people plump. She lives <em>reputably</em>, and is, as I find, <em>aforehand</em> in the world.</p>
					<p>If these, or any other of the lodgings I have mentioned, be not altogether to your lady’s mind, she may continue in them <em>the less while</em>, and <em>choose others for herself</em>.</p>
					<p>The widow consents that you shall take them for a <em>month only</em>, and <em>what</em> of them you please. The terms, she says, she will not fall out upon, when she knows what your lady expects, and what <em>her</em> servants are to do, or <em>yours</em> will undertake; for she observed that servants are generally worse to deal with than their masters or mistresses.</p>
					<p>The lady may board or not as she pleases.</p>
					<p>As we <em>suppose you married</em>, but that you have reason, from family-differences, to keep it private for the present, I thought it not amiss to hint as much to the widow (but as <em>uncertainty</em>, however); and asked her, if she could, in that case, accommodate you and your servants, as well as the lady and hers? She said, she could; and wished, by all means, it were to be so: since the circumstance of a person’s <q>being single</q>, it not as well recommended as this lady, was <q>one of the usual exceptions</q>.</p>
					<p>If none of these lodgings please, you need not doubt very handsome ones in or near Hanover-square, Soho-square, Golden-square, or in some of the new streets about Grosvenor-square. And <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Doleman, her sister, and myself, most cordially join to offer to your good lady the best accommodations we can make for her at Uxbridge (and also for you, if you are the happy man we wish you to be), till she fits herself more to her mind.</p>
					<p>Let me add, that the lodgings at the mercer’s, those in Cecil-street, those at the widow’s in Dover-street, any of them, may be entered upon at a day’s warning.</p>
					<p>I am, my dear Sir,</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your sincere and affectionate friend and servant,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">Tho.</abbr> Doleman.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>You will easily guess, my dear, when you have read the letter, <em>which</em> lodgings I made choice of. But first to try him, (as in so material a point I thought I could not be too circumspect), I seemed to prefer those in Norfolk-street, for the very reason the writer gives why he thought I would <em>not</em>; that is to say, for its neighbourhood to a city so well governed as London is said to be. Nor should I have disliked a lodging in the heart of it, having heard but indifferent accounts of the liberties sometimes taken at the other end of the town.⁠—Then seeming to incline to the lodgings in Cecil-street⁠—Then to the mercer’s. But he made no visible preference; and when I asked his opinion of the widow gentlewoman’s, he said he thought those the most to my taste and convenience: but as he hoped that I would think lodgings necessary but for a very little while, he knew not which to give his vote for.</p>
				<p>I then fixed upon the widow’s; and he has written accordingly to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Doleman, making my compliments to his lady and sister, for their kind offer.</p>
				<p>I am to have the dining-room, the bedchamber with the light-closet, (of which, if I stay any time at the widow’s, I shall make great use), and a servant’s room; and we propose to set out on Saturday morning. As for a maidservant, poor Hannah’s illness is a great disappointment to me: but, as he observes, I can make the widow satisfaction for one of hers, till I can get a servant to my mind. And you know I want not much attendance.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace has just now, of his own accord, given me five guineas for poor Hannah. I send them enclosed. Be so good as to cause them to be conveyed to her, and to let her know from whom they came.</p>
				<p>He has obliged me much by this little mark of his considerateness. Indeed I have the better opinion of him ever since he proposed her return to me.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>I have just now <em>another</em> instance of his considerateness. He came to me, and said that, on second thoughts, he could not bear that I should go up to town without some attendant, were it but for the look of the thing to the London widow and her nieces, who, according to his friend’s account, <q>lived so genteelly</q>; and especially <q>as I required him to leave me so soon after I arrived there</q>, and so would be left alone among strangers. He therefore sought that I might engage <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sorlings to lend me one of her two maids, or let one of her daughters go up with me, and stay till I were provided. And if the latter, the young gentlewoman, no doubt, would be glad of so good an opportunity to see the curiosities of the town, and would be a proper attendant on the same occasions.</p>
				<p>I told him as I had done before, that the two young gentlewomen were so equally useful in their way, and servants in a busy farm were so little to be spared, that I should be loth to take them off their laudable employments. Nor should I think much of diversions for one while; and so the less want an attendant out of doors.</p>
				<p>And now, my dear, lest anything should happen, in so variable a situation as mine, to overcloud my prospects, (which at present are more promising than ever yet they have been since I quitted Harlowe-place), I will snatch the opportunity to subscribe myself</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your not unhoping and<br/>
					ever-obliged friend and servant,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
