<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 112: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-112" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">112</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>You tell me, my dear, that my clothes and the little sum of money I left behind me, will not be sent me.⁠—But I will still hope. It is yet early days. When their passions subside, they will better consider of the matter; and especially as I have my ever dear and excellent mother for my friend in this request! O the sweet indulgence! How has my heart bled, and how does it still bleed for her!</p>
				<p>You advise me not to depend upon a reconciliation. I do not, I cannot depend upon it. But nevertheless, it is the wish next my heart. And as to this man, what can I do? You see, <em>that marriage is not absolutely in my own power</em>, if I were <em>inclined</em> to prefer it to the trial which I think I ought to have principally in view to make for a reconciliation.</p>
				<p>You say, he is proud and insolent⁠—indeed he is. But can it be your opinion, that he intends to humble me down to the level of his mean pride?</p>
				<p>And what mean you, my dear friend, when you say, that I must throw off <q>a little more of the veil</q>?⁠—Indeed I never knew that I wore one. Let me assure you, that if I never see anything in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace that looks like a design to humble me, his insolence shall never make me discover a weakness unworthy of a person distinguished by your friendship; that is to say, unworthy either of my <em>sex</em>, or of my <em>former self</em>.</p>
				<p>But I hope, as I am out of all other protection, that he is not capable of mean or low resentments. If he has had any extraordinary trouble on my account, may he not thank himself for it? He may; and lay it, if he pleases, to his <em>character</em>; which, as I have told him, gave at least a <em>pretence</em> to my brother against him. And then, did I ever make him any promises? Did I ever profess a love for him? Did I ever wish for the continuance of his address? Had not my brother’s violence precipitated matters, would not my indifference to him in all likelihood (as I designed it should) have tired out his proud spirit,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a> and make him set out for London, where he used chiefly to reside? And if he <em>had</em>, would not there have been an end of all his pretensions and hopes? For no encouragement had I given him; nor did I then correspond with him. Nor, believe me, should I have begun to do so⁠—the fatal rencounter not having then happened; which drew me in afterwards for others’ sakes (fool that I was!) and not for my own. And can you think, or can <em>he</em>, that even this but temporarily-intended correspondence (which, by the way, my mother<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a> connived at) would have ended thus, had I not been driven on one hand, and teased on the other, to continue it, the occasion which had at first induced it continuing? What pretence then has he, were I to be absolutely in his power, to avenge himself on me for the faults of others, and through which I have suffered more than he? It cannot, cannot be, that I should have cause to apprehend him to be so ungenerous, so bad a man.</p>
				<p>You bid me not to be concerned at the bickerings between your mother and you. Can I avoid concern, when those bickerings are on my account? That they are raised (instigated shall I say?) by my uncle, and my other relations, surely must add to my concern.</p>
				<p>But I must observe, perhaps too critically for the state my mind is in at present, that the very sentences you give from your mother, as in so many <em>imperatives</em>, which you take amiss, are very severe reflections upon yourself. For instance⁠—<q>You <em>shall</em>, I tell you, Nancy</q>, implies that you had disputed her will⁠—and so of the rest.</p>
				<p>And further let me observe, with respect to what you say, that there cannot be the same reason for a prohibition of correspondence with me, as there was of mine with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace; that I thought as little of bad consequences from my correspondence with him at the time, as you can do from yours with me now. But, if <q>obedience be a duty</q>, the <em>breach</em> of it is a <em>fault</em>, however circumstances may differ. Surely there is no merit in setting up our own judgment against the judgments of our parents. And if it is punishable so to do, I have been severely punished; and that is what I warned you of from my own dear experience.</p>
				<p>Yet, God forgive me! I advise thus against myself with very great reluctance: and, to say truth, have not strength of mind, at present, to decline it myself. But, if my occasion go not off, I will take it into further consideration.</p>
				<p>You give me very good advice in relation to this man; and I thank you for it. When you bid me be more upon the <em>reserve</em> with him in expressing my displeasure, perhaps I may try for it: but to <em>palliate</em>, as you call it, that, my dearest Miss Howe, cannot be done, by</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your own,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
