<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 525: Lord M. to John Belford, Esq. M. Hall,</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-525" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">525</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Hall,</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday, <time datetime="09-29"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 29</time></p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Sir,</p>
				</header>
				<p>My kinsman Lovelace is now setting out for London; proposing to see you, and then to go to Dover, and so embark. God send him well out of the kingdom!</p>
				<p>On Monday he will be with you, I believe. Pray let me be favoured with an account of all your conversations; for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mowbray and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tourville are to be there too; and whether you think he is grown quite his own man again.</p>
				<p>What I mostly write for is, to wish you to keep Colonel Morden and him asunder; and so I give you notice of his going to town. I should be very loth there should be any mischief between them, as you gave me notice that the Colonel threatened my nephew. But my kinsman would not bear that; so nobody let him know that he did. But I hope there is no fear; for the Colonel does not, as I hear, threaten now. For his own sake, I am glad of that; for there is not such a man in the world as my kinsman is said to be, at all the weapons⁠—as well he was not; he would not be so daring.</p>
				<p>We shall all here miss the wild fellow. To be sure, there is no man better company when he pleases.</p>
				<p>Pray, do you never travel thirty or forty miles? I should be glad to see you here at <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Hall. It will be charity when my kinsman is gone; for we suppose you will be his chief correspondent; although he has promised to write to my nieces often. But he is very apt to forget his promises; to us his relations particularly. God preserve us all; Amen! prays</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your very humble servant,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">
						<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>
					</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
