<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 331: Miss Charlotte Montague, to Miss Howe M. Hall,</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-331" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">331</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Charlotte Montague, to Miss Howe <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Hall,</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday Afternoon</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Miss Howe,</p>
				</header>
				<p>Your letter has infinitely disturbed us all.</p>
				<p>This wretched man has been half distracted ever since Saturday night.</p>
				<p>We knew not what ailed him, till your letter was brought.</p>
				<p>Vile wretch, as he is, he is however innocent of this new evil.</p>
				<p>Indeed he is, he <em>must</em> be; as I shall more at large acquaint you.</p>
				<p>But will not now detain your messenger.</p>
				<p>Only to satisfy your just impatience, by telling you, that the dear young lady is safe, and we hope well.</p>
				<p>A horrid mistake of his general orders has subjected her to the terror and disgrace of an arrest.</p>
				<p>Poor dear Miss Harlowe!⁠—Her sufferings have endeared her to us, almost as much as her excellencies can have endeared her to you.</p>
				<p>But she must now be quite at liberty.</p>
				<p>He has been a distracted man, ever since the news was brought him; and we knew not what ailed him.</p>
				<p>But that I said before.</p>
				<p>My Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> my lady Sarah Sadleir, and my Lady Betty Lawrance, will all write to you this very afternoon.</p>
				<p>And so will the wretch himself.</p>
				<p>And send it by a servant of their own, not to detain yours.</p>
				<p>I know not what I write.</p>
				<p>But you shall have all the particulars, just, and true, and fair, from</p>
				<p>Dear Madam,</p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your most faithful and obedient servant,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Ch.</abbr> Montague.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
