<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 150: Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-150" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">150</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, <time datetime="04-27">April 27</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>I am sorry you sent back my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Norris</i>. But you must be allowed to do as you please. So must I, in my turn. We must neither of us, perhaps, expect absolutely of the other what is the rightest thing to be done: and yet few folks, so young as we are, <em>better</em> know <em>what the rightest is</em>. I cannot separate myself from you; although I give a double instance of my vanity in joining myself with you in this particular assertion.</p>
				<p>I am most heartily rejoiced that your prospects are so much mended; and that, as I hoped, good has been produced out of evil. What must the man have been, what must have been his views, had he not taken such a turn, upon a letter so vile, and upon a treatment so unnatural, himself principally the occasion of it?</p>
				<p>You <em>know best</em> your <em>motives</em> for suspending: but I wish you <em>could</em> have taken him at offers so earnest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref-117" epub:type="noteref">117</a> Why should you not have permitted him to send for Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>’s chaplain? If punctilio only was in the way, and want of a license, and of proper preparations, and suchlike, my service to you, my dear: and there is ceremony tantamount to your ceremony.</p>
				<p>Do not, do not, my dear friend, <em>again</em> be so very melancholy a decliner as to prefer a shroud, when the matter you wish for is in your power; and when, as you have justly said heretofore, <q>persons cannot die when they will</q>.</p>
				<p>But it is a strange perverseness in human nature that we slight that when near us which at a distance we wish for.</p>
				<p>You have now but one point to pursue: that is marriage: let that be solemnized. Leave the rest to Providence, and, to use your own words in a former letter, follow as that leads. You will have a handsome man, a genteel man; he would be a <em>wise</em> man, if he were not vain of his endowments, and wild and intriguing: but while the eyes of many of our sex, taken by so specious a form and so brilliant a spirit, encourage that vanity, you must be contented to stay till grey hairs and prudence enter upon the stage together. You would not have everything in the same man.</p>
				<p>I believe <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hickman treads no crooked paths; but he hobbles most ungracefully in a straight one. Yet <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hickman, though he <em>pleases</em> not my eye, nor <em>diverts</em> my ear, will not, as I believe, <em>disgust</em> the one, nor <em>shock</em> the other. Your man, as I have lately said, will always keep up attention; you will always be alive with him, though perhaps more from fears than hopes: while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hickman will neither say anything to keep one awake, nor yet, by shocking adventures, make one’s slumbers uneasy.</p>
				<p>I believe I now know which of the two men so prudent a person as <em>you</em> would, at first, have chosen; nor doubt I that you can guess which <em>I</em> would have made choice of, if I might. But proud as we are, the proudest of us all can <em>only</em> refuse, and many of us accept the but half-worthy, for fear a still worse should offer.</p>
				<p>If men had chosen their mistresses for spirits like their own, although <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, at the long run, may have been <em>too many for me</em>, I don’t doubt but I should have given heartache for heartache, for one half-year at least; while you, with my dull-swift, would have glided on <em>as</em> serenely, <em>as</em> calmly, as unaccountably, as the succeeding seasons; and varying no otherwise than they, to bring on new beauties and conveniencies to all about you.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>I was going on in this style⁠—but my mother broke in upon me with a prohibitory aspect. “She gave me leave for one letter only.”⁠—She had just parted with your odious uncle, and they have been in close conference again.</p>
				<p>She has vexed me. I must lay this by till I hear from you again, not knowing whither to send it.</p>
				<p>Direct me to a <em>third place</em>, as I desired in my former.</p>
				<p>I told my mother (on her challenging me) that I was writing indeed, and to you: but it was only to amuse myself; for I protested <q>that I knew not where to send to you</q>.</p>
				<p>I hope that your next may inform me of your nuptials, although the next to that were to acquaint me that he was the most ungratefullest monster on earth; as he must be, if not the kindest husband in it.</p>
				<p>My mother has vexed me. But so, on revising, I wrote before.⁠—But she has <em>unhinged</em> me, as you call it: pretended to catechise Hickman, I assure you, for contributing to our supposed correspondence. Catechised him <em>severely</em> too, upon my word!⁠—I believe I have a sneaking kindness for the sneaking fellow, for I cannot endure that anybody should treat him like a fool but myself.</p>
				<p>I believe, between you and me, the good lady forgot herself. I heard her loud. She possibly imagined that my father was come to life again. Yet the meekness of the man might have soon convinced her, I should have thought; for my father, it seems, would talk as loud as she, I suppose, (though within a few yards of each other), as if both were out of their way, and were hallooing at half a mile’s distance, to get in again.</p>
				<p>I know you’ll blame me for this sauciness⁠—but I told you I was vexed; and if I had not a spirit, my parentage on both sides might be doubted.</p>
				<p>You must not chide me too severely, however, because I have learned of you not to defend myself in an error: and I own I am wrong: and that’s enough: you won’t be so generous in this case as you are in every other, if you don’t think it is.</p>
				<p>Adieu, my dear! I must, I will love you, and love you forever! So subscribes your</p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Anna Howe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
