<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 411: Mr. Belford, to Robert Lovelace, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-411" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">411</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Robert Lovelace, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Monday, <time datetime="08-15"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 15</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>I am extremely concerned for thy illness. I should be very sorry to lose thee. Yet, if thou diest so soon, I could wish, from my soul, it had been before the beginning of last April: and this as well for thy sake, as for the sake of the most excellent woman in the world: for then thou wouldst not have had the most crying sin of thy life to answer for.</p>
				<p>I was told on Saturday that thou wert very much out of order; and this made me forbear writing till I heard farther. Harry, on his return from thee, confirmed the bad way thou art in. But I hope Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> in his unmerited tenderness for thee, thinks the worst of thee. What can it be, Bob? A violent fever, they say; but attended with odd and severe symptoms.</p>
				<p>I will not trouble thee in the way thou art in, with what passes here with Miss Harlowe. I wish thy repentance as swift as thy illness; and as efficacious, if thou diest; for it is else to be feared, that she and you will never meet in one place.</p>
				<p>I told her how ill you are. Poor man! said she. <em>Dangerously</em> ill, say you?</p>
				<p>Dangerously <em>indeed</em>, Madam!⁠—So Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> sends me word!</p>
				<p>God be merciful to him, if he die!⁠—said the admirable creature.⁠—Then, after a pause, Poor wretch!⁠—may he meet with the mercy he has not shown!</p>
				<p>I send this by a special messenger: for I am impatient to hear how it goes with thee.⁠—If I have received thy <em>last</em> letter, what melancholy reflections will that <em>last</em>, so full of shocking levity, give to</p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Thy true friend,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">John Belford.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
