<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 40: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-40" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">40</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p class="explanatory">[In continuation of the subject in <a href="letter-38.xhtml">Letter 38</a>]</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>I will now, though midnight (for I have no sleep in my eyes) resume the subject I was forced so abruptly to quit, and will obey yours, Miss Lloyd’s, Miss Campion’s, and Miss Biddulph’s call, with as much temper as my divided thought will admit. The dead stillness of this solemn hour will, I hope, contribute to calm my disturbed mind.</p>
				<p>In order to acquit myself of so heavy a charge as that of having reserves to so dear a friend, I will acknowledge (and I thought I had over-and-over) that it is owing to my particular situation, if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace appears to me in a tolerable light: and I take upon me to say, that had they opposed to him a man of sense, of virtue, of generosity; one who enjoyed his fortune with credit, who had a tenderness in his nature for the calamities of others, which would have given a moral assurance, that he would have been still less wanting in grateful returns to an obliging spirit:⁠—had they opposed such a man as this to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, and been as earnest to have me married, as now they are, I do not know myself, if they would have had reason to tax me with that invincible obstinacy which they lay to my charge: and this whatever had been the <em>figure</em> of the man; since the <em>heart</em> is what we women should judge by in the choice we make, as the best security for the party’s good behaviour in every relation of life.</p>
				<p>But, situated as I am, thus persecuted and driven, I own to you, that I have now-and-then had a little more difficulty than I wished for, in passing by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s tolerable qualities, to keep up my dislike to him for his others.</p>
				<p>You say, I must have argued with myself in his favour, and in his disfavour, on a supposition, that I might possibly be one day his. I own that I have: and thus called upon by my dearest friend, I will set before you both parts of the argument.</p>
				<p>And first, <em>what occurred to me in his favour</em>.</p>
				<p>At his introduction into our family, his negative virtues were insisted upon:⁠—He was no gamester; no horse-racer; no fox-hunter; no drinker: my poor aunt Hervey had, in confidence, given us to apprehend much disagreeable evil (especially to a wife of the least delicacy) from a wine-lover: and common sense instructed us, that sobriety in a man is no small point to be secured, when so many mischiefs happen daily from excess. I remember, that my sister made the most of this favourable circumstance in his character while she had any hopes of him.</p>
				<p>He was never thought to be a niggard; not even ungenerous: nor when his conduct came to be inquired into, an extravagant, a squanderer: his pride (so far was it a laudable pride) secured him from that. Then he was ever ready to own his errors. He was no jester upon sacred things: poor <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wyerley’s fault; who seemed to think there was wit in saying bold things, which would shock a serious mind. His conversation with <em>us</em> was always unexceptionable, even chastely so; which, be his actions what they would, showed him capable of being influenced by <em>decent</em> company; and that he might probably therefore be a <em>led</em> man, rather than a <em>leader</em>, in other company. And one late instance, so late as last Saturday evening, has raised him not a little in my opinion, with regard to this point of good (and at the same time, of manly) behaviour.</p>
				<p>As to the advantage of birth, that is of his side, above any man who has been found out for me. If we may judge by that expression of his, which you were pleased with at the time; “That upon <em>true</em> quality, and <em>hereditary</em> distinction, if good sense were not wanting, <q>honour sat as easy as his glove</q>;” that, with <em>as</em> familiar an air, was his familiar expression; “while none but the prosperous upstart, <strong>mushroomed</strong> into rank, (another of his peculiars), was arrogantly proud of it.”⁠—If, I say, we may judge of him by this, we shall conclude in his favour, that he knows what sort of behaviour is to be expected from persons of birth, whether he act up to it or not. Conviction is half way to amendment.</p>
				<p>His fortunes in possession are handsome; in expectation, splendid: so nothing need be said on that subject.</p>
				<p>But it is impossible, say some, that he should make a tender or kind husband. Those who are for imposing upon me such a man as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes, and by methods so violent, are not entitled to make this objection. But now, on this subject, let me tell you how I have argued with myself⁠—for still you must remember, that I am upon the extenuating part of his character.</p>
				<p>A great deal of the treatment a wife may expect from him, will possibly depend upon herself. Perhaps she must <em>practise</em> as well as <em>promise</em> obedience, to a man so little used to control; and must be careful to oblige. And what husband expects not this?⁠—The <em>more</em> perhaps if he had not reason to assure himself of the preferable love of his wife before she became such. And how much easier and pleasanter to obey the man of her choice, if he should be even more unreasonable sometimes, than one she would not have had, could she have avoided it? Then, I think, as the men were the framers of the matrimonial office, and made <em>obedience</em> a part of the woman’s vow, she ought not, even in <em>policy</em>, to show him, that she can break through <em>her</em> part of the contract, (however lightly she may think of the instance), lest <em>he</em> should take it into his head (himself is judge) to think as lightly of other points, which she may hold more important⁠—but, indeed, no point so solemnly vowed can be slight.</p>
				<p>Thus principled, and <em>acting</em> accordingly, what a wretch must that husband be, who could treat such a wife brutally!⁠—Will Lovelace’s <em>wife</em> be the only person to whom he will not pay the grateful debt of civility and good manners? He is allowed to be brave: Who ever knew a brave man, if a brave man of <em>sense</em>, an universally base man? And how much the gentleness of our sex, and the manner of our training up and education, make us need the protection of the brave, and the countenance of the generous, let the general approbation, which we are all so naturally inclined to give to men of that character, testify.</p>
				<p>At worst, will he confine me prisoner to my chamber? Will he deny me the visits of my dearest friend, and forbid me to correspond with her? Will he take from me the mistressly management, which I had not faultily discharged? Will he set a servant over me, with license to insult me? Will he, as he has not a <em>sister</em>, permit his cousins Montague, or would either of those ladies <em>accept</em> of a permission, to insult and tyrannize over me?⁠—It cannot be.⁠—Why then, think I often, do you tempt me, O my cruel friends, to try the difference?</p>
				<p>And then has the secret pleasure intruded itself, to be able to reclaim such a man to the paths of virtue and honour: to be a <em>secondary</em> means, if I were to be his, of saving him, and preventing the mischiefs so enterprising a creature might otherwise be guilty of, if he be such a one.</p>
				<p>When I have thought of him in these lights, (and that as a man of sense he will sooner see his errors, than another), I own to you, that I have had some difficulty to avoid taking the path they so violently endeavour to make me shun: and all that command of my passions which has been attributed to me as my greatest praise, and, in so young a creature, as my distinction, has hardly been sufficient for me.</p>
				<p>And let me add, that the favour of his relations (all but himself unexceptionable) has made a good deal of additional weight, thrown in the same scale.</p>
				<p><em>But now, in his disfavour.</em> When I have reflected upon the prohibition of my parents; the giddy appearance, disgraceful to our sex, that such a preference would have: that there is no manner of likelihood, enflamed by the rencounter, and upheld by art and ambition on my brother’s side, that ever the animosity will be got over: that I must therefore be at perpetual variance with all my own family: that I must go to <em>him</em>, and to <em>his</em>, as an obliged and half-fortuned person: that his aversion to them all is as strong as theirs to him: that his whole family are hated for his sake; they hating ours in return: that he has a very immoral character as to women: that knowing this, it is a high degree of impurity to think of joining in wedlock with such a man: that he is young, unbroken, his passions unsubdued: that he is violent in his temper, yet artful; I am afraid vindictive too: that such a husband might unsettle me in all my own principles, and hazard my future hopes: that his own relations, two excellent aunts, and an uncle, from whom he has such large expectations, have no influence upon him: that what tolerable qualities he has, are founded more in pride than in virtue: that allowing, as he does, the excellency of moral precepts, and believing the doctrine of future rewards and punishments, he can live as if he despised the one, and defied the other: the probability that the taint arising from such free principles, may go down into the manners of posterity: that I knowing these things, and the importance of them, should be more inexcusable than one who knows them not; since an error <em>against</em> judgment is worse, infinitely worse, than an error <em>in</em> judgment. Reflecting upon these things, I cannot help conjuring you, my dear, to pray <em>with</em> me, and to pray <em>for</em> me, that I may not be pushed upon such indiscreet measures, as will render me inexcusable to myself: for that is the test, after all. The world’s opinion ought to be but a secondary consideration.</p>
				<p>I have said in his praise, that he is extremely ready to <em>own his errors</em>: but I have sometimes made a great drawback upon this article, in his disfavour; having been ready to apprehend, that this ingenuousness may possibly be attributable to two causes, neither of them, by any means, creditable to him. The one, that his vices are so much his masters, that he <em>attempts</em> not to conquer them; the other, that he may think it policy, to give up <em>one half</em> of his character to save the <em>other</em>, when the <em>whole</em> may be blamable: by this means, silencing by acknowledgment the objections he cannot answer; which may give him the praise of ingenuousness, when he can obtain no other, and when the <em>challenged</em> proof might bring out, upon discussion, other evils. These, you will allow, are severe constructions; but everything his enemies say of him cannot be false.</p>
				<p>I will proceed by-and-by.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Sometimes we have both thought him one of the most undesigning <em>merely</em> witty men we ever knew; at other times one of the deepest creatures we ever conversed with. So that when in one visit we have imagined we fathomed him, in the next he has made us ready to give him up as impenetrable. This impenetrableness, my dear, is to be put among the shades in his character. Yet, upon the whole, you have been so far of his party, that you have contested that his principal fault is over-frankness, and too much regardlessness of appearances, and that he is too giddy to be very artful: you would have it, that <em>at the time</em> he says anything good, he means what he speaks; that his variableness and levity are constitutional, owing to sound health, and to a soul and body (that was your observation) fitted for and pleased with each other. And hence you concluded, that could this <q>consentaneousness</q> (as you call it) of corporal and animal faculties be pointed by discretion; that is to say, could his vivacity be confined within the pale of <em>but</em> moral obligations, he would be far from being rejectable as a companion for life.</p>
				<p>But I used then to say, and I still am of opinion, that he wants a <em>heart</em>: and if he does, he wants everything. A wrong <em>head</em> may be convinced, may have a right turn given it: but who is able to give a <em>heart</em>, if a heart be wanting? Divine Grace, working a miracle, or next to a miracle, can only change a bad heart. Should not one fly the man who is but <em>suspected</em> of such a one? What, O what, do parents do, when they endeavour to force a child’s inclination, but make her think better than otherwise she would think of a man obnoxious to themselves, and perhaps whose character will not stand examination?</p>
				<p>I have said, that I think <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace a vindictive man: upon my word, I have sometimes doubted, whether his perseverance in his addresses to me has not been the more obstinate, since he has found himself so disagreeable to my friends. From that time I verily think he has been the more fervent in them; yet courts them not, but sets them at defiance. For this indeed he pleads disinterestedness (I am sure he cannot politeness); and the more plausibly, as he is apprised of the ability they have to make it worth his while to court them. ’Tis true he has declared, and with too much reason, (or there would be no bearing him), that the lowest submissions on his part would not be accepted; and to oblige me, has offered to seek a reconciliation with them, if I would give him hope of success.</p>
				<p>As to his behaviour at church, the Sunday before last, I lay no stress upon that, because I doubt there was too much <q>outward pride</q> in his <q>intentional humility</q>, or Shorey, who is not his enemy, could not have mistaken it.</p>
				<p>I do not think him so deeply learned in human nature, or in ethics, as some have thought him. Don’t you remember how he stared at the following trite observations, which every moralist could have furnished him with? Complaining as he did, in a half-menacing strain, of the obloquies raised against him⁠—“That if he were innocent, he should despise the obloquy: if not, revenge would not wipe off his guilt.” “That nobody ever thought of turning a sword into a sponge!” “That it was in his own power by reformation of an error laid to his charge by an enemy, to make that enemy one of his best friends; and (which was the noblest revenge in the world) <em>against his will</em>; since an enemy would not <em>wish</em> him to be without the faults he taxed him with.”</p>
				<p>But the <em>intention</em>, he said, was the wound.</p>
				<p>How so, I asked him, when <em>that</em> cannot wound without the <em>application</em>? “That the adversary only held the sword: he himself pointed it to his breast:⁠—And why should he mortally resent that malice, which he might be the better for as long as he lived?”⁠—What could be the reading he has been said to be master of, to wonder, as he did, at these observations?</p>
				<p>But, indeed, he must take pleasure in revenge; and yet holds others to be inexcusable for the same fault. He is not, however, the only one who can see how truly blamable those errors are in another, which they hardly think such in themselves.</p>
				<p>From these considerations, from these <em>overbalances</em>, it was, that I said, in a former, that I would not be in love with this man for the world: and it was going further than prudence would warrant, when I was for compounding with you, by the words <q>conditional liking</q>, which you so humorously rally.</p>
				<p>Well but, methinks you say, what is all this to the purpose? This is still but reasoning: but, if you <em>are</em> in love, you <em>are</em>: and love, like the vapours, is the deeper rooted for having no sufficient cause assignable for its hold. And so you call upon me again to have no reserves, and so-forth.</p>
				<p>Why then, my dear, if you will have it, I think, that, with all his preponderating faults, I like him better than I ever thought I should like him; and, those faults considered, better perhaps than <em>I ought</em> to like him. And I believe, it is possible for the persecution I labour under to induce me to like him still more⁠—especially while I can recollect to his advantage our last interview, and as every day produces stronger instances of <em>tyranny</em>, I will call it, on the other side.⁠—In a word, I will frankly own (since you cannot think anything I say too explicit) that were he <em>now</em> but a moral man, I would prefer him to all the men I ever saw.</p>
				<p>So that this is but <q>conditional liking</q> still, you’ll say: nor, I hope, is it more. I never was in <em>love</em> as it is called; and whether this be <em>it</em>, or not, I must submit to <em>you</em>. But will venture to think it, if it be, no such <em>mighty</em> monarch, no such unconquerable power, as I have heard it represented; and it must have met with greater encouragement than I think I have given it, to be absolutely unconquerable⁠—since I am persuaded, that I could yet, without a <em>throb</em>, most willingly give up the one man to get rid of the <em>other</em>.</p>
				<p>But now to be a little more serious with you: if, my dear, my particularly-unhappy situation <em>had</em> driven (or <em>led</em> me, if you please) into a <em>liking</em> of the man; and if that liking <em>had</em>, in your opinion, inclined me to <em>love</em> him, should <em>you</em>, whose mind is susceptible of the most friendly impressions, who have such high notions of the delicacy which ought to be observed by our sex in these matters, and who actually <em>do</em> enter so deeply into the distresses of one you love⁠—should <em>you</em> have pushed so far that unhappy friend on so very nice a subject?⁠—Especially, when I aimed not (as you could <q>prove by fifty</q> instances, it seems) to guard <q>against being found out</q>. Had you rallied me by word of mouth in the manner you do, it might have been more in character; especially, if your friend’s distresses had been surmounted, and if she had affected prudish airs in revolving the subject: but to sit down to write it, as methinks I see you, with a gladdened eye, and with all the archness of exultation⁠—indeed, my dear, (and I take notice of it, rather for the sake of your own generosity, than for my sake, for, as I have said, I love your raillery), it is not so <em>very</em> pretty; the delicacy of the subject, and the delicacy of your own mind, considered.</p>
				<p>I lay down my pen here, that you may consider of it a little, if you please.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>I resume, to give you my opinion of the force which <em>figure</em> or <em>person</em> ought to have upon our sex: and this I shall do both <em>generally</em> as to the other sex, and <em>particularly</em> as to this man; whence you will be able to collect how far my friends are in the right, or in the wrong, when they attribute a good deal of prejudice in favour of one man, and in disfavour of the other, on the score of figure. But, first, let me observe, that they see abundant reason, on comparing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes together, to believe that this <em>may</em> be a consideration with me; and therefore they believe it <em>is</em>.</p>
				<p>There is certainly something very plausible and attractive, as well as creditable to a woman’s <em>choice</em>, in <em>figure</em>. It gives a favourable impression at first sight, in which we wish to be confirmed: and if, upon further acquaintance, we find reason to be so, we are pleased with our judgment, and like the person the better, for having given us cause to compliment our own sagacity, in our first-sighted impressions. But, nevertheless, it has been generally a rule with me, to suspect a fine figure, both in man and woman; and I have had a good deal of reason to approve my rule;⁠—with regard to <em>men</em> especially, who ought to value themselves rather upon their intellectual than personal qualities. For, as to our sex, if a fine woman should be led by the opinion of the world, to be vain and conceited upon her form and features; and that to such a degree, as to have neglected the more material and more <em>durable</em> recommendations, the world will be ready to excuse her; since a pretty fool, in all she says, and in all she does, will please, we know not why.</p>
				<p>But who would grudge this pretty fool her short day! Since, with her summer’s sun, when her butterfly flutters are over, and the winter of age and furrows arrives, she will feel the just effects of having neglected to cultivate her better faculties: for then, lie another Helen, she will be unable to bear the reflection even of her own glass, and being sunk into the insignificance of a <em>mere old woman</em>, she will be entitled to the contempts which follow that character. While the <em>discreet matron</em>, who carries <em>up</em> (we will not, in such a one’s case, say <em>down</em>) into advanced life, the ever-amiable character of virtuous prudence and useful experience, finds solid veneration take place of airy admiration, and more than supply the want of it.</p>
				<p>But for a <em>man</em> to be vain of his person, how effeminate! If such a one happens to have genius, it seldom strikes deep into intellectual subjects. His outside usually runs away with him. To adorn, and perhaps, <em>intending</em> to adorn, to render ridiculous that person, takes up all his attention. All he does is <em>personal</em>; that is to say, <em>for</em> himself: all he admires, <em>is</em> himself: and in spite of the correction of the stage, which so often and so justly exposes a coxcomb, he usually dwindles down, and sinks into that character; and, of consequence, becomes the scorn of one sex, and the jest of the other.</p>
				<p>This is generally the case of your fine figures of men, and of those who value themselves on dress and outward appearance: whence it is, that I repeat, that <em>mere person</em> in a man is a despicable consideration. But if a man, <em>besides</em> figure, has learning, and such talents as <em>would</em> have distinguished him, whatever were his form, then indeed <em>person</em> is an addition: and if he has not run too egregiously into self-admiration, and if he has preserved his morals, he is truly a valuable being.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace has certainly taste; and, as far as I am able to determine, he has judgment in most of the politer arts. But although he has a humorous way of carrying it off, yet one may see that he values himself not a little, both on his person and his parts, and even upon his <em>dress</em>; and yet he has so happy an ease in the latter, that it seems to be the least part of his study. And as to the former, I should hold myself inexcusable, if I were to add to his vanity by showing the <em>least</em> regard for what is too evidently so <em>much his</em>.</p>
				<p>And now, my dear, let me ask you, Have I come up to your expectation? If I have not, when my mind is more at ease, I will endeavour to please you better. For, methinks, my sentences drag, my style creeps, my imagination is sunk, my spirits serve me not, only to tell you, that whether I have more or less, I am wholly devoted to the commands of my dear Miss Howe.</p>
				<footer>
					<div epub:type="z3998:postscript">
						<p><abbr class="initialism">P.S.</abbr>: The insolent Betty Barnes has just now fired me anew, by reporting to me the following expressions of the hideous creature, Solmes⁠—“That he is <em>sure</em> of the coy girl; and that <q>with little labour to himself</q>. That be I ever so averse to him beforehand, he can depend upon my principles; and it will be a pleasure to him to see by what pretty degrees I shall come to.” (Horrid wretch!) “That it was Sir Oliver’s observation, who knew the world perfectly well, that <em>fear</em> was a better security than <em>love</em>, for a woman’s good behaviour to her husband; although, for his part, to such a fine creature (truly) he would try what love would do, for a few weeks at least; being unwilling to believe what the old knight used to aver, that fondness spoils more wives than it makes good.”</p>
						<p>What think you, my dear, of such a wretch as this! tutored, too, by that old surly <em>misogynist</em>, as he was deemed, Sir Oliver?⁠—</p>
					</div>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
