<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 400: Mr. Belford, to Robert Lovelace, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-400" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">400</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Robert Lovelace, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday, <time datetime="08-11"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 11</time></p>
				</header>
				<div class="abstract">
					<p>[<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford acquaints his friend with the generosity of Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> and the Ladies of his family; and with the Lady’s grateful sentiments upon the occasion.</p>
					<p>He says, that in hopes to avoid the pain of seeing <em>him</em>, (<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace), she intends to answer his letter of the <time datetime="08-07">7th</time>, though much against her inclination.]</p>
				</div>
				<p>“She took great notice,” says <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford, “of that passage in yours, which makes necessary to the <em>Divine</em> pardon, the forgiveness of a person causelessly injured.</p>
				<p>“Her grandfather, I find, has enabled her at eighteen years of age to make her will, and to devise great part of his estate to whom she pleases of the family, and the rest out of it (if she die single) at her own discretion; and this to create respect to her! as he apprehended that she would be envied: and she now resolves to set about making her will out of hand.”</p>
				<p class="abstract">[<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford insists upon the promise he had made him, not to molest the Lady: and gives him the contents of her answer to Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> and the Ladies of his Lordship’s family, declining their generous offers. See <a href="letter-398.xhtml">Letter 398</a>.]</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
