<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 343: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-343" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">343</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday Afternoon</p>
				</header>
				<p>You pain me, Miss Howe, by the ardour of your noble friendship. I will be brief, because I am not well; yet a good deal better than I was; and because I am preparing an answer to yours of the <time datetime="07-13">13th</time>. But, before hand, I must tell you, my dear, I will <em>not</em> have that man⁠—don’t be angry with me. But indeed I won’t. So let him be asked no questions about me, I beseech you.</p>
				<p>I do <em>not</em> despond, my dear. I hope I may say, <em>I will not</em> despond. Is not my condition greatly mended? I thank Heaven it is!</p>
				<p>I am no prisoner now in a vile house. I am not now in the power of that man’s devices. I am not now obliged to hide myself in corners for fear of him. One of his intimate companions is become my warm friend, and engages to keep him from me, and that by his own consent. I am among honest people. I have all my clothes and effects restored to me. The wretch himself bears testimony to my honour.</p>
				<p>Indeed I am very weak and ill: but I have an excellent physician, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> and as worthy an apothecary, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Goddard.⁠—Their treatment of me, my dear, is perfectly <em>paternal</em>!⁠—My mind too, I can find, begins to strengthen: and methinks, at times, I find myself superior to my calamities.</p>
				<p>I shall have sinkings sometimes. I must expect such. And my father’s maledict⁠—But you will chide me for introducing that, now I am enumerating my comforts.</p>
				<p>But I charge you, my dear, that you do not suffer my calamities to sit too heavily upon your own mind. If you do, that will be to new-point some of those arrows that have been blunted and lost their sharpness.</p>
				<p>If you would contribute to <em>my</em> happiness, give way, my dear, to <em>your own</em>; and to the cheerful prospects before you!</p>
				<p>You will think very meanly of your Clarissa, if you do not believe, that the greatest pleasure she can receive in this life is in your prosperity and welfare. Think not of me, my only friend, but as we were in times past: and suppose me gone a great, great way off!⁠—A long journey!⁠—How often are the dearest of friends, at their country’s call, thus parted⁠—with a <em>certainty</em> for years⁠—with a <em>probability</em> forever.</p>
				<p>Love me still, however. But let it be with a weaning love. I am not what I was, when we were <em>inseparable</em> lovers, as I may say.⁠—Our <em>views</em> must now be different⁠—Resolve, my dear, to make a worthy man happy, because a worthy man make <em>you</em> so.⁠—And so, my dearest love, for the present adieu!⁠—adieu, my dearest love!⁠—but I shall soon write again, I hope!</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
