<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 95: Mr. Lovelace, to Joseph Leman</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-95" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">95</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to Joseph Leman</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sat. <time datetime="04-08">April 8</time></p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Honest Joseph,</p>
				</header>
				<p>At length your beloved young lady has consented to free herself from the cruel treatment she has so long borne. She is to meet me without the garden-door at about four o’clock on Monday afternoon. I told you she had promised to do so. She has confirmed her promise. Thank Heaven she has confirmed her promise!</p>
				<p>I shall have a chariot-and-six ready in the byroad fronting the private path to Harlowe-paddock; and several of my friends and servants not far off, armed to protect her, if there be occasion: but everyone charged to avoid mischief. That, you know, has always been my principal care.</p>
				<p>All my fear is, that, when she comes to the point, the over-niceness of her principles will make her waver, and want to go back: although <em>her</em> honour is <em>my</em> honour, you know, and <em>mine</em> is <em>hers</em>. If she should, and should I be unable to prevail upon her, all your past services will avail nothing, and she will be lost to me forever: the prey then of that cursed Solmes, whose vile stinginess will never permit him to do good to any of the servants of the family.</p>
				<p>I have no doubt of your fidelity, honest Joseph; nor of your zeal to serve an injured gentleman, and an oppressed young lady. You see by the confidence I repose in you, that I have <em>not</em>; more particularly, on this very important occasion, in which your assistance may crown the work: for, if she waver, a little innocent contrivance will be necessary.</p>
				<p>Be very mindful, therefore, of the following directions; take them into your heart. This will probably be your last trouble, until my beloved and I are joined in holy wedlock: and then we will be sure to take care of you. You know what I have promised. No man ever reproached me for breach of word.</p>
				<p>These, then, honest Joseph, are they:</p>
				<p>Contrive to be in the garden, in <em>disguise</em>, if possible, and unseen by your young lady. If you find the garden-door unbolted, you will know that she and I are together, although you should not see her go out at it. It will be locked, but my key shall be on the ground just without the door, that you may open it with yours, as it may be needful.</p>
				<p>If you hear our voices parleying, keep at the door till I cry Hem, hem, twice: but be watchful for this signal; for I must not hem very loud, lest she should take it for a signal. Perhaps, in struggling to prevail upon the dear creature, I may have an opportunity to strike the door hard with my elbow, or heel, to confirm you⁠—then you are to make a violent burst against the door, as if you would break it open, drawing backward and forward the bolt in a hurry: then, with another push, but with more noise than strength, lest the lock give way, cry out (as if you saw some of the family) Come up, come up, instantly!⁠—Here they are! Here they are!⁠—Hasten!⁠—This instant! hasten! And mention swords, pistols, guns, with as terrible a voice as you can cry out with. Then shall I prevail upon her, no doubt, if loth before, to fly. If I cannot, I will enter the garden with her, and the house too, be the consequence what it will. But, so affrighted, these is no question but she will fly.</p>
				<p>When you think us at a sufficient distance (and I shall raise my voice urging her swifter flight, that you may guess at <em>that</em>) then open the door with your key: but you must be sure to open it very cautiously, lest we should not be far enough off. I would not have her know you have a hand in this matter, out of my great regard to you.</p>
				<p>When you have opened the door, take your key out of the lock, and put it in your pocket: then, stooping for mine, put it in the lock on the <em>inside</em>, that it may appear as if the door was opened by herself, with a key, which they will suppose to be of my procuring (it being new) and left open by us.</p>
				<p>They <em>should</em> conclude she is gone off by her own consent, that they may not pursue us: that they may see no hopes of tempting her back again. In either case, mischief might happen, you know.</p>
				<p>But you must take notice, that you are only to open the door with your key, in case none of the family come up to interrupt us, and before we are quite gone: for, if they do, you’ll find by what follows, that you must not open the door at all. Let them, on breaking it open, or by getting over the wall, find my key on the ground, if they will.</p>
				<p>If they do not come to interrupt us, and if you, by help of your key, come out, follow us at a distance; and, with uplifted hands, and wild impatient gestures, (running backward and forward, for fear you should come up too near us, and as if you saw somebody coming to your assistance), cry out for help, help, and to hasten. Then shall we be soon at the chariot.</p>
				<p>Tell the family that you saw me enter a chariot with her: a dozen, or more, men on horseback, attending us; all armed; some with blunderbusses, as you believe; and that we took quite the contrary way to that we should take.</p>
				<p>You see, honest Joseph, how careful I am, as well as you, to avoid mischief.</p>
				<p>Observe to keep at such a distance that she may not discover who you are. Take long strides, to alter your gait; and hold up your head, honest Joseph; and she’ll not know it to be you. Men’s airs and gaits are as various and peculiar as their faces. Pluck a stake out of one of the hedges: and tug at it, though it may come easy: this, if she turn back, will look terrible, and account for your not following us faster. Then, returning with it, shouldered, to brag to the family what you would have done, could you have overtaken us, rather than your young lady should be carried off by such a ⸻ And you may call me names, and curse me. And these airs will make you look valiant, and in earnest. You see, honest Joseph, I am always contriving to give <em>you</em> reputation. No man suffers by serving me.</p>
				<p>But, if our parley should last longer than I wish; and if any of her friends miss her before I cry, Hem, hem, twice; then, in order to save yourself, (which is a very great point with me, I assure you), make the same noise as above: but as I directed before, open not the door with your key. On the contrary, wish for a key with all your heart; but for fear any of them should by accident have a key about them, keep in readiness half a dozen little gravel-stones, no bigger than peas, and thrust two or three slyly into the keyhole; which will hinder their key from turning round. It is good, you know, Joseph, to provide against every accident in such an important case, as this. And let this be your cry, instead of the other, if any of my enemies come in your sight, as you seem to be trying to burst the door open, Sir! Sir! or Madam! Madam! O Lord, hasten! O Lord, hasten! <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace! <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace!⁠—And very loud⁠—and that shall quicken me more than it shall those you call to.⁠—If it be Betty, and only Betty, I shall think worse of your art of making love<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a> than of your fidelity, if you can’t find a way to amuse her, and put her upon a false scent.</p>
				<p>You must tell them that your young lady seemed to run as fast off with me as I with her. This will also confirm to them that all pursuit is in vain. An end will hereby be put to Solmes’s hopes: and her friends, after a while, will be more studious to be reconciled to her than to get her back. So you will be a happy instrument of great good to all round. And this will one day be acknowledged by both families. You will then be everyone’s favourite; and every good servant, for the future, will be proud to be likened to honest Joseph Leman.</p>
				<p>If she should guess at you, or find you out, I have it already in my head to write a letter for you to copy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a> which, occasionally produced, will set you right with her.</p>
				<p>This one time be diligent, be careful: this will be the crown of all: and once more, depend, for a recompense, upon the honour of</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your assured friend,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Lovelace.</p>
					<div epub:type="z3998:postscript">
						<p>You need not be so much afraid of going too far with Betty. If you <em>should</em> make a match with her, she is a very likely creature, though a vixen, as you say. I have an admirable receipt to cure a termagant wife.⁠—Never fear, Joseph, but thou shalt be master of thine house. If she be very troublesome, I can teach thee how to break her heart in a twelvemonth; and <em>honestly</em> too;⁠—or the precept would not be mine.</p>
						<p>I enclose a new earnest of my future favour.</p>
					</div>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
