<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 105: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-105" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">105</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p class="explanatory">[In continuation]</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>Never was there such a pair of scribbling lovers as we;⁠—yet perhaps whom it so much concerns to keep from each other what each writes. She <em>won’t</em> have anything else to do. I <em>would</em>, if she’d let me. I am not reformed enough for a husband.⁠—<q>Patience is a virtue</q>, Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> says. <q>Slow and sure</q>, is another of his sentences. If I had not a great deal of that virtue, I should not have waited the Harlowes own time of ripening into execution my plots upon themselves and upon their goddess daughter.</p>
				<p>My beloved has been writing to her saucy friend, I believe, all that has befallen her, and what has passed between us hitherto. She will possibly have fine subjects for her pen, if she be as minute as I am.</p>
				<p>I would not be so barbarous as to permit old Antony to set <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howe against her, did I not dread the consequences of the correspondence between the two young ladies. So lively the one, so vigilant, so prudent both, who would not wish to outwit such girls, and to be able to twirl them round his finger?</p>
				<p>My charmer has written to her sister for her clothes, for some gold, and for some of her books. What books can tell her more than she knows? But <em>I</em> can. So she had better study <em>me</em>.</p>
				<p>She <em>may</em> write. She must be obliged to me at last, with all her pride. Miss Howe indeed will be ready enough to supply her; but I question, whether she can do it without her mother, who is as covetous as the grave. And my agent’s agent, old Antony, has already given the mother a hint which will make her jealous of <em>pecuniaries</em>.</p>
				<p>Besides, if Miss Howe has money by her, I can put her mother upon borrowing it of her: nor blame me, Jack, for contrivances that have their foundation in generosity. Thou knowest my spirit; and that I should be proud to lay an obligation upon my charmer to the amount of half, nay, to the whole of my estate. Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> has more for me than I can ever wish for. My predominant passion is <em>girl</em>, not <em>gold</em>; nor value I <em>this</em>, but as it helps me to <em>that</em>, and gives me independence.</p>
				<p>I was forced to put it into the sweet novice’s head, as well for <em>my</em> sake as for <em>hers</em> (lest we should be traceable by <em>her</em> direction) whither to direct the sending of her clothes, if they incline to do her that small piece of justice.</p>
				<p>If they do I shall begin to dread a reconciliation; and must be forced to muse for a contrivance or two to prevent it, and <em>to avoid mischief</em>. For that (as I have told honest Joseph Leman) is a great point with me.</p>
				<p>Thou wilt think me a sad fellow, I doubt. But are not all rakes sad fellows?⁠—And art not thou, to thy little power, as bad as any? If thou dost all that’s in thy head and in thy heart to do, thou art worse than I; for I do not, I assure you.</p>
				<p>I proposed, and she consented, that her clothes, or whatever else her relations should think fit to send her, should be directed to thy cousin Osgood’s. Let a special messenger, at my charge, bring me any letter, or portable parcel, that shall come. If not portable, give me notice of it. But thou’lt have no trouble of this sort from her relations, I dare be sworn. And in this assurance, I will leave them, I think, to act upon their own heads. A man would have no more to answer for than needs must.</p>
				<p>But one thing, while I think of it; <em>which is of great importance to be attended to</em>⁠—You must hereafter write to me in character, as I shall do to you. It would be a confounded thing to be blown up by a train of my own laying. And who knows what opportunities a man in love may have against himself? In changing a coat or waistcoat, something might be forgotten. I once suffered that way. Then for the sex’s curiosity, it is but remembering, in order to guard against it, that the name of their common mother was Eve.</p>
				<p>Another thing remember; I have changed my name: changed it without an act of parliament. “Robert Huntingford” it is now. Continue <em>Esquire</em>. It is a respectable addition, although every sorry fellow assumes it, almost to the banishment of the usual traveling one of <em>Captain</em>. “To be left till called for, at the post-house at Hertford.”</p>
				<p>Upon naming thee, she asked thy character. I gave thee a better than thou deservest, in order to do credit to <em>myself</em>. Yet I told her, that thou wert an awkward fellow; and this to do credit to <em>thee</em>, that she may not, if ever she be to see thee, expect a cleverer man than she’ll find. Yet thy <em>apparent</em> awkwardness befriends thee not a little: for wert thou a sightly mortal, people would discover nothing extraordinary in thee, when they conversed with thee: whereas, seeing a bear, they are surprised to find in thee anything that is like a man. Felicitate thyself then upon thy defects; which are evidently thy principal perfections; and which occasion thee a distinction which otherwise thou wouldst never have.</p>
				<p>The lodgings we are in at present are not convenient. I was so delicate as to find fault with them, as communicating with each other, because I knew <em>she</em> would; and told her, that were I sure she was safe from pursuit, I would leave her in them, (since such was her earnest desire and expectation), and go to London.</p>
				<p>She must be an infidel against all reason and appearances, if I do not banish even the <em>shadow</em> of mistrust from her heart.</p>
				<p>Here are two young likely girls, daughters of the widow Sorlings; that’s the name of our landlady.</p>
				<p>I have only, at present, admired them in their dairy-works. How greedily do the sex swallow praise!⁠—Did I not once, in the streets of London, see a well-dressed, handsome girl laugh, bridle, and visibly enjoy the praises of a sooty dog, a chimney-sweeper; who, with his empty sack across his shoulder, after giving her the way, stopped, and held up his brush and shovel in admiration of her?⁠—Egad, girl, thought I, I despise thee as Lovelace: but were I the chimney-sweeper, and could only contrive to get into thy presence, my life to thy virtue, I would have thee.</p>
				<p>So pleased was I with the young Sorlings, for the elegance of her works, that I kissed her, and she made me a courtesy for my condescension; and blushed, and seemed <em>sensible all over</em>: encouraging, yet innocently, she adjusted her handkerchief, and looked towards the door, as much as to say, she would not tell, were I to kiss her again.</p>
				<p>Her eldest sister popped upon her. The conscious girl blushed again, and looked so confounded, that I made an excuse for her, which gratified both. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty, said I, I have been so much pleased with the neatness of your dairy-works, that I could not help saluting your sister: you have <em>your</em> share of merit in them, I am sure⁠—Give me leave⁠—</p>
				<p>Good souls!⁠—I like them both⁠—she courtesied too!⁠—How I love a grateful temper! O that my Clarissa were but half so acknowledging!</p>
				<p>I think I must get one of them to attend my charmer when she removes⁠—the mother seems to be a notable woman. She had not best, however, be <em>too</em> notable: since, were she by suspicion to give me a face of difficulty to the matter, it would prepare me for a trial with one or both the daughters.</p>
				<p>Allow me a little rodomontade, Jack⁠—but really and truly my heart is fixed. I can think of no creature breathing of the sex, but my Gloriana.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
