<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 125: Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-125" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">125</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p class="explanatory">[In continuation]</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace told me, that on the supposition that his proposal in relation to my cousin Morden might not be accepted, he had been studying to find out, if possible, some other expedient that might be agreeable, in order to convince me, that he preferred my satisfaction to his own.</p>
				<p>He then offered to go himself, and procure my Hannah to come and attend me. As I had declined the service of either of the young Misses Sorlings, he was extremely solicitous, he said, that I should have a servant in whose integrity I might confide.</p>
				<p>I told him, that you would be so kind as to send to engage Hannah, if possible.</p>
				<p>If anything, he said, should prevent Hannah from coming, suppose he himself waited upon Miss Howe, to desire her to lend me <em>her</em> servant till I was provided to my mind?</p>
				<p>I said, your mother’s high displeasure at the step I had taken, (as <em>she</em> supposed, voluntarily), had deprived me of an open assistance of that sort from <em>you</em>.</p>
				<p>He was amazed, so much as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Howe herself used to admire me, and so great an influence as Miss Howe was supposed, and deserved to have over her mother, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Howe should take upon herself to be so much offended with me. He wished that the man, who took such pains to keep up and enflame the passions of my father and uncles, were not at the bottom of this mischief too.</p>
				<p>I was afraid, I said, that my brother was: or else my uncle Antony, I dared to say, would not have taken such pains to set <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Howe against me, as I understood he had done.</p>
				<p>Since I had declined visiting Lady Sarah, and Lady Betty, he asked me, if I should admit of a visit from his cousin Montague, and accept of a servant of hers for the present?</p>
				<p>That was not, I said, an acceptable proposal: but I would first see if my friends would send me my clothes, that I might not make such a giddy and runaway appearance to any of his relations.</p>
				<p>If I pleased, he would take another journey to Windsor, to make a more particular inquiry amongst the canons, or in any worthy family.</p>
				<p>Were not his objections as to the publicness of the place, I asked him, as strong now as before?</p>
				<p>I remember, my dear, in one of your former letters, you mentioned London as the most private place to be in:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref-101" epub:type="noteref">101</a> and I said, that since he made such pretences against leaving me here, as showed he had no intention to do so; and since he engaged to go from me, and leave me to pursue my own measures, if I were elsewhere; and since his presence made these lodgings inconvenient to me; I should not be disinclined to go to London, did I know anybody there.</p>
				<p>As he had several times proposed London to me, I expected that he would eagerly have embraced that motion from me. But he took not ready hold of it: yet I thought his eye approved of it.</p>
				<p>We are both great watchers of each other’s eyes; and, indeed, seem to be more than half afraid of each other.</p>
				<p>He then made a grateful proposal to me: “that I would send for my Norton to attend me.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref-102" epub:type="noteref">102</a></p>
				<p>He saw by my eyes, he said, that he had at last been happy in an expedient, which would answer the wishes of us both. Why, says he, did I not think of it before?⁠—And snatching my hand, Shall I write, Madam? Shall I send? Shall I go and fetch the worthy woman myself?</p>
				<p>After a little consideration, I told him that this was <em>indeed</em> a grateful motion: but that I apprehended it would put her to a difficulty which she would not be able to get over; as it would make a woman of her known prudence appear to countenance a fugitive daughter in opposition to her parents; and as her coming to me would deprive her of my mother’s favour, without its being in my power to make it up to her.</p>
				<p>O my beloved creature! said he, <em>generously enough</em>, let not this be an obstacle. I will do everything for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Norton you wish to have done.⁠—Let me go for her.</p>
				<p>More coolly than perhaps his generosity deserved, I told him it was impossible but I must soon hear from my friends. I should not, meantime, embroil anybody with them. Not <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Norton especially, from whose interest in, and mediation with, my mother, I might expect some good, were she to keep herself in a neutral state: that, besides, the good woman had a mind above her fortune; and would sooner want than be beholden to anybody improperly.</p>
				<p><em>Improperly!</em> said he.⁠—Have not persons of merit a <em>right</em> to all the benefits conferred upon them?⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Norton is so good a woman, that I shall think she lays me under an obligation if she will put it in my power to serve her; although she were <em>not</em> to augment it, by giving me the opportunity, at the same time, of contributing to your pleasure and satisfaction.</p>
				<p>How could this man, with such powers of right thinking, be so far depraved by evil habits, as to disgrace his talents by wrong acting?</p>
				<p>Is there not room, after all, thought I, at the time, to hope (as he so lately led me to hope) that the example it will behove me, for <em>both</em> our sakes, to endeavour to set him, may influence him to a change of manners, in which both may find our account?</p>
				<p>Give me leave, Sir, said I, to tell you, there is a strange mixture in your mind. You must have taken <em>pains</em> to suppress many good motions and reflections as they arose, or levity must have been surprisingly predominant in it.⁠—But as to the subject we were upon, there is no taking any resolutions till I hear from my friends.</p>
				<p>Well, Madam, I can only say, I would find out some expedient, if I could, that should be agreeable to you. But since I cannot, will you be so good as to tell me what you would wish to have done? Nothing in the world but I will comply with, excepting leaving you here, at such a distance from the place I shall be in, if anything should happen; and in a place where my gossiping rascals have made me in a manner public, for want of proper cautions at first.</p>
				<p>These vermin, added he, have a pride they can hardly rein-in, when they serve a man of family. They boast of their master’s pedigree and descent, as if they were related to him. Nor is anything they know of him, or of his affairs, a secret to one another, were it a matter that would hang him.</p>
				<p>If so, thought I, men of family should take care to give them subjects worth boasting of.</p>
				<p>I am quite at a loss, said I, what to do or where to go. Would you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, in earnest, advise me to think of going to London?</p>
				<p>And I looked at him with steadfastness. But nothing could I gather from his looks.</p>
				<p>At first, Madam, said he, I was for proposing London, as I was then more apprehensive of pursuit. But as your relations seem cooler on that head, I am the more indifferent about the place you go to.⁠—So as <em>you</em> are pleased, so as <em>you</em> are easy, I shall be happy.</p>
				<p>This indifference of his to London, I cannot but say, made me incline the more to go thither. I asked him (to hear what he would say) if he could recommend me to any <em>particular place</em> in London?</p>
				<p>No, he said: none that was fit for me, or that I should like. His friend Belford, indeed, had very handsome lodgings near Soho-square, at a relation’s, whose wife was a woman of virtue and honour. These, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford was generally in the country, he could borrow till I was better accommodated.</p>
				<p>I was resolved to refuse these at the first mention, as I should any other he had named. Nevertheless, I will see, thought I, if he has really thought of these for me. If I break off the talk here, and he resume this proposal with earnestness in the morning, I shall apprehend that he is less indifferent than he seems to be about my going to London, and that he has already a lodging in his eye for me. And then I will not go at all.</p>
				<p>But after such generous motions from him, I really think it a little barbarous to act and behave as if I thought him capable of the blackest and most ungrateful baseness. But his character, his principles, are so faulty! He is so light, so vain, so various, that there is no certainty that he will be next hour what he is this. Then, my dear, I have no guardian now; no father, no mother! only God and my vigilance to depend upon. And I have no reason to expect a miracle in my favour.</p>
				<p>Well, Sir, said I, (rising to leave him), something must be resolved upon: but I will postpone this subject till tomorrow morning.</p>
				<p>He would fain have engaged me longer: but I said I would see him as early as he pleased in the morning. He might think of any convenient place in London, or near it, in meantime.</p>
				<p>And so I retired from him. As I do from my pen; hoping for better rest for the few hours that remain of this night than I have had of a long time.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
