<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 108: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-108" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">108</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday, <time datetime="04-13"><abbr>Apr.</abbr> 13</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>Why, Jack, thou needest not make such a <em>wonderment</em>, as the girls say, if I should have taken large strides already towards reformation: for dost thou not see, that while I have been so assiduously, night and day, pursuing this single charmer, I have infinitely less to answer for, than otherwise I should have had? Let me see, how many days and nights?⁠—Forty, I believe, after open trenches, spent in the sap only, and never a mine sprung yet!</p>
				<p>By a moderate computation, a dozen kites might have fallen, while I have been only trying to ensnare this single lark. Nor yet do I see when I shall be able to bring her to my lure: more innocent days yet, therefore!⁠—But reformation for my stalking-horse, I hope, will be a sure, though a slow method to effect all my purposes.</p>
				<p>Then, Jack, <em>thou</em> wilt have a merit too in engaging my pen, since thy time would be otherwise worse employed: and, after all, who knows but by creating new habits, at the expense of the old, a real reformation may be brought about? I have promised it; and I believe there is a pleasure to be found in being good, reversing that of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Nat.</abbr> Lee’s madman,</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>—Which none but <em>good</em> men know.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>By all this, seest thou not how greatly preferable it is, on twenty accounts, to pursue a difficult rather than an easy chase? I have a desire to inculcate this pleasure upon thee, and to teach thee to fly at nobler game than daws, crows, and widgeons: I have a mind to show thee from time to time, in the course of the correspondence thou hast so earnestly wished me to begin on this illustrious occasion, that these exalted ladies may be abased, and to obviate one of the objections that thou madest to me, when we were last together, that the pleasure which attends these nobler aims, remunerates not the pains they bring with them; since, like a paltry fellow as thou wert, thou assertedst that all women are alike.</p>
				<p>Thou knowest nothing, Jack, of the delicacies of intrigue: nothing of the glory of outwitting the witty and the watchful: of the joys that fill the mind of the inventive or contriving genius, ruminating which to use of the different webs that offer to him for the entanglement of a haughty charmer, who in her day has given him unnumbered torments. Thou, Jack, who, like a dog at his ease, contentest thyself to growl over a bone thrown out to thee, dost not know the joys of a chase, and in pursuing a winding game: these I will endeavour to rouse thee to, and then thou wilt have reason doubly and trebly to thank me, as well because of thy present delight, as with regard to thy prospect beyond the moon.</p>
				<p>To this place I had written, purely to amuse myself, before I was admitted to my charmer. But now I have to tell thee, that I was quite right in my conjecture, that she would set up for herself, and dismiss me: for she has declared in so many words that such was her resolution: And why? Because, to be plain with me, the more she saw of <em>me</em>, and of <em>my ways</em>, the less she liked of either.</p>
				<p>This cut me to the heart! I did not cry, indeed! Had I been a <em>woman</em>, I should though, and that most plentifully: but I pulled out a white cambrick handkerchief: <em>that</em> I could command, but not my <em>tears</em>.</p>
				<p>She finds fault with my protestations, with my professions, with my vows: I cannot curse a servant, the only privilege a master is known by, but I am supposed to be a trooper<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a>⁠—I must not say, By my soul! nor, As I hope to be saved! Why, Jack, how particular this is! Would she not have me think I have a precious soul, as well as she? If she thinks my salvation hopeless, what a <em>devil</em> (another exceptionable word!) does she propose to reform me for? So I have not an ardent expression left me.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>What can be done with a woman who is above flattery, and despises all praise but that which flows from the approbation of her own heart?</p>
				<p>Well, Jack, thou seest it is high time to change my measures. I must run into the <em>pious</em> a little faster than I had designed.</p>
				<p>What a sad thing it would be, were I, after all, to lose her person, as well as her opinion! the only time that further acquaintance, and no blow struck, nor suspicion given, ever lessened me in a lady’s favour! A cursed mortification!⁠—’Tis certain I can have no pretence for holding her, if she will go. No such thing as force to be used, or so much as hinted at: Lord send us safe at London!⁠—That’s all I have for it now: and yet it must be the least part of my speech.</p>
				<p>But why will this admirable creature urge her destiny? Why will she defy the power she is absolutely dependent upon? Why will she still wish to my face that she had never left her father’s house? Why will she deny me her company, till she makes me lose my patience, and lay myself open to her resentment? And why, when she is offended, does she carry her indignation to the utmost length that a scornful beauty, in the <em>very height</em> of her <em>power</em> and <em>pride</em>, can go?</p>
				<p>Is it prudent, thinkest thou, in <em>her</em> circumstances, to tell me, <em>repeatedly</em> to tell me, “That she is every hour more and more dissatisfied with herself and me? That I am not one who improve upon her in my conversation and address?” (Couldst <em>thou</em>, Jack, bear this from a captive!) “That she shall not be easy while she is with me? That she knows better than to value herself upon my volubility? That if I think she deserves the compliments I make her, I may pride myself in those arts, by which I have made a fool of so extraordinary a person? That she shall never forgive herself for <q>meeting me</q>, nor me for <q>seducing</q> her away?” (<em>Her very words</em>). “That her regrets increase instead of diminish? That she will take care of herself; and, since her friends think it not worth while to pursue her, she will be left to her own care? That I shall make <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sorlings’s house more agreeable by my absence?⁠—And go to <abbr epub:type="z3998:place">Berks.</abbr>, to town, or wherever I will,” (to the devil, I suppose), “with all her heart?”</p>
				<p>The impolitic charmer!⁠—To a temper so vindictive as she thinks mine! To a free-liver, as she believes me to be, who has her in his power! I was <em>before</em>, as thou knowest, balancing; now this scale, now that, the heaviest. I only waited to see how <em>her</em> will would work, how <em>mine</em> would lead me on. Thou seest what bias here takes⁠—And wilt thou doubt that mine will be determined by it? Were not her faults, before this, numerous enough? Why will she put me upon looking back?</p>
				<p>I will sit down to argue with myself by-and-by, and thou shalt be acquainted with the result.</p>
				<p>If thou didst but know, if thou hadst but beheld, what an abject slave she made me look like!⁠—I had given myself high airs, as <em>she</em> called them: but they were airs that showed my love for her: that showed I could not live out of her company. But she took me down with a vengeance! She made me look about me. So much advantage had she over me; such severe turns upon me; by my soul, Jack, I had hardly a word to say for myself. I am ashamed to tell thee what a poor creature she made me look like! But I could have told her something that would have humbled her pretty pride at the instant, had she been in a <em>proper</em> place, and <em>proper</em> company about her.</p>
				<p>To such a place then⁠—and where she cannot fly me⁠—And <em>then</em> to see how my will works, and what can be done with the <em>amorous seesaw</em>; now humble, now proud; now expecting, or demanding; now submitting, or acquiescing⁠—till I have tried resistance.</p>
				<p>But these hints are at present enough. I may further explain myself as I go along; and as I confirm or recede in my future motions. If she <em>will</em> revive past disobligations! If she <em>will</em>⁠—But no more, no more, as I said, <em>at present</em>, of threatenings.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
