<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 122: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-122" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">122</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sunday Night, <time datetime="04-16">April 16</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>I may send to you, although you are forbid to write to me; may I not?⁠—For that is not a <em>correspondence</em> (is it?) where letters are not answered.</p>
				<p>I am strangely at a loss what to think of this man. He is a perfect Proteus. I can but write according to the shape he assumes at the time. Don’t think <em>me</em> the changeable person, I beseech you, if in one letter I contradict what I wrote in another; nay, if I seem to contradict what I said in the same letter: for he is a perfect chameleon; or rather more variable than the chameleon; for that, it is said, cannot assume the <em>red</em> and the <em>white</em>; but this man can. And though black seems to be his natural colour, yet has he taken great pains to make me think him nothing but <em>white</em>.</p>
				<p>But you shall judge of him as I proceed. Only, if I anywhere appear to you to be credulous, I beg you to set me right: for you are a stander-by, as you say in a former<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref-96" epub:type="noteref">96</a>⁠—Would to Heaven I were not to play! for I think, after all, I am held to a desperate game.</p>
				<p>Before I could finish my last to you, he sent up twice more to beg admittance. I returned for answer, that I would see him at my own time: I would neither be invaded nor prescribed to.</p>
				<p>Considering how we parted, and my delaying his <em>audience</em>, as he sometimes calls it, I expected him to be in no very good humour, when I admitted of his visit; and by what I wrote, you will conclude that <em>I</em> was not. Yet mine soon changed, when I saw his extreme humility at his entrance, and heard what he had to say.</p>
				<p>I have a letter, Madam, said he, from Lady Betty Lawrance, and another from my cousin Charlotte. But of these more by-and-by. I came now to make my humble acknowledgement to you upon the arguments that passed between us so lately.</p>
				<p>I was silent, wondering what he was driving at.</p>
				<p>I am a most unhappy creature, proceeded he: unhappy from a strange impatiency of spirit, which I cannot conquer. It always brings upon me deserved humiliation. But it is more laudable to acknowledge, than to persevere when under the power of conviction.</p>
				<p>I was still silent.</p>
				<p>I have been considering what you proposed to me, Madam, that I should acquiesce with such terms as you should think proper to comply with, in order to a reconciliation with your friends.</p>
				<p>Well, Sir.</p>
				<p>And I find all just, all right, on your side; and all impatience, all inconsideration on mine.</p>
				<p>I stared, you may suppose. Whence this change, Sir? and so soon?</p>
				<p>I am so much convinced that you must be in the right in all you think fit to insist upon, that I shall for the future mistrust myself; and, if it be possible, whenever I differ with you, take an hour’s time for recollection, before I give way to that vehemence, which an opposition, to which I have not been accustomed, too often gives me.</p>
				<p>All this is mighty good, Sir: But to what does it tend?</p>
				<p>Why, Madam, when I came to consider what you had proposed, as to the terms of reconciliation with your friends; and when I recollected that you had always <em>referred to yourself</em> to <em>approve</em> or <em>reject</em> me, according to my <em>merits</em> or <em>demerits</em>; I plainly saw, that it was rather a <em>condescension</em> in you, that you were pleased to ask my consent to those terms, than that you were imposing a <em>new law</em>: and I now, Madam, beg your pardon for my impatience: whatever terms you think proper to come into with your relations, which will enable you to honour me with the <em>conditional</em> effect of your promise to me, to these be pleased to consent: and if I lose you, insupportable as that thought is to me; yet, as it must be by my own fault, I ought to thank myself for it.</p>
				<p>What think you, Miss Howe?⁠—Do you believe he can have any view in this?⁠—I cannot see any he could have; and I thought it best, as he put it in so right a manner, to appear not to doubt the sincerity of his confession, and to accept of it as sincere.</p>
				<p>He then read to me part of Lady Betty’s letter; turning down the beginning, which was a little too severe upon him, he said, for my eye: and I believe, by the style, the remainder of it was in a <em>corrective</em> strain.</p>
				<p>It was too plain, I told him, that he must have great faults, that none of his relations could write to him, but with a mingled censure for some bad action.</p>
				<p>And it is as plain, my dearest creature, said he, that you, who know not of any such faults, but by surmise, are equally ready to condemn me.⁠—Will not charity allow you to infer, that <em>their</em> charges are no better grounded?⁠—And that my principal fault has been carelessness of my character, and too little solicitude to clear myself, when aspersed? Which, I do assure you, is the case.</p>
				<p>Lady Betty, in her letter, expresses herself in the most obliging manner in relation to me. “She wishes him so to behave, as to encourage me to make him soon happy. She desires her compliments to me; and expresses her impatience to see, as her niece, so <q>celebrated a lady</q> (those are her high words). She shall take it for an honour, she says, to be put into a way to oblige me. She hopes I will not too long delay the ceremony; because that performed, will be to her, and to Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> and Lady Sarah, a sure pledge of her nephew’s merits and good behaviour.”</p>
				<p>She says, “she was always sorry to hear of the hardships I had met with on his account: that he will be the most ungrateful of men, if he make it not <q>all up</q> to me: and that she thinks it incumbent upon all their family to supply to me the lost favour of my own: and, for her part, nothing of that kind, she bids him assure me, shall be wanting.”</p>
				<p>Her ladyship observes, “That the treatment he had received from my family would have been much more unaccountable than it was, with such natural and accidental advantages as he had, had it not been owing to his own careless manners. But she hopes that he will convince the Harlowe family that they had thought worse of him than he had deserved; since now it was in his power to establish his character forever. This she prays to God to enable him to do, as well for his own honour, as for the honour of their <q>house</q>,” was the magnificent word.</p>
				<p>She concludes, with “desiring to be informed of our nuptials the moment they are celebrated, that she may be with the earliest in felicitating me on the happy occasion.”</p>
				<p>But her Ladyship gives me no direct invitation to attend her before the marriage: which I might have expected from what he had told me.</p>
				<p>He then showed me part of Miss Montague’s more sprightly letter, “congratulating him upon the honour he had obtained, of the <q>confidence of so admirable a</q> lady.” These are her words. Confidence, my dear! Nobody, indeed, as you say, will believe otherwise, were they to be told the truth: and you see that Miss Montague (and all his family, I suppose) think that the step I have taken an <em>extraordinary</em> one. “<em>She</em> also wishes for his speedy nuptials; and to see her new cousin at <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Hall: as do Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> she tells him, and her sister; and in general all the well-wishers of their family.</p>
				<p>“Whenever this happy day shall be passed, she proposes, she says, to attend me, and to make one in my train to <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Hall, if his Lordship shall continue as ill of the gout as he is at present. But that, should he get better, he will himself attend me, she is sure, and conduct me thither; and afterwards quit either of his three seats to us, till we shall be settled to our mind.”</p>
				<p>This young lady says nothing in excuse for not meeting me on the road, or <abbr>St.</abbr> Alban’s, as he had made me expect she would: yet mentions <q>her having been indisposed</q>. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace had also told me, that Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> was <q>ill of the gout</q>; which Miss Montague’s letter confirms.</p>
				<p>But why did not the man show me these letters last night? Was he afraid of giving me too much pleasure?</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
