<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 536: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-536" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">536</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Trent, <time datetime="12-03"><abbr>Dec.</abbr> 3</time> / <time datetime="12-14">14</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>Tomorrow is to be the day, that will, in all probability, send either one or two ghosts to attend the manes of my <strong>Clarissa</strong>.</p>
				<p>I arrived here yesterday; and inquiring for an English gentleman of the name of Morden, soon found out the Colonel’s lodgings. He had been in town two days; and left his name at every probable place.</p>
				<p>He was gone to ride out; and I left <em>my</em> name, and where to be found; and in the evening he made me a visit.</p>
				<p>He was plaguey gloomy. That was not I. But yet he told me that I had acted like a man of true spirit in my first letter; and with honour, in giving him so readily this meeting. He wished I had in other respects; and then we might have seen each other upon better terms than now we did.</p>
				<p>I said there was no recalling what was passed; and that I wished some things had not been done, as well as he.</p>
				<p>To recriminate now, he said, would be as exasperating as unavailable. And as I had so cheerfully given him this opportunity, words should give place to business.⁠—<em>Your</em> choice, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, of time, of place, of weapon, shall be <em>my</em> choice.</p>
				<p>The two latter be yours, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morden. The time tomorrow, or next day, as you please.</p>
				<p>Next day, then, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace; and we’ll ride out tomorrow, to fix the place.</p>
				<p>Agreed, Sir.</p>
				<p>Well: now, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, do you choose the weapon.</p>
				<p>I said I believed we might be upon an equal footing with the single rapier; but, if he thought otherwise, I had no objection to a pistol.</p>
				<p>I will only say, replied he, that the chances may be more equal by the sword, because we can neither of us be to seek in that; and you would stand, says he, a worse chance, as I apprehend, with a pistol; and yet I have brought two, that you may take your choice of either; for, added he, I have never missed a mark at pistol-distance, since I knew how to hold a pistol.</p>
				<p>I told him, that he spoke like himself; that I was expert enough that way, to embrace it, if he chose it; though not so sure of my mark as he pretended to be. Yet the devil’s in it, Colonel, if I, who have slit a bullet in two upon a knife’s edge, hit not my man. So I have no objection to a pistol, if it be <em>your</em> choice. No man, I’ll venture to say, has a steadier hand or eye than I have.</p>
				<p>They may both be of use to you, Sir, at the sword, as well as at the pistol: the sword, therefore, be the thing, if you please.</p>
				<p>With all my heart.</p>
				<p>We parted with a solemn sort of ceremonious civility: and this day I called upon him; and we rode out together to fix upon the place: and both being of one mind, and hating to put off for the morrow what could be done today, would have decided it then: but De la Tour, and the Colonel’s valet, who attended us, being unavoidably let into the secret, joined to beg we would have with us a surgeon from Brixen, whom La Tour had fallen in with there, and who had told him he was to ride next morning to bleed a person in a fever, at a lone cottage, which, by the surgeon’s description, was not far from the place where we then were, if it were not that very cottage within sight of us.</p>
				<p>They overtook so to manage it, that the surgeon should know nothing of the matter till his assistance was called in. And La Tour, being, as I assured the Colonel, a ready contriving fellow, (whom I ordered to obey him as myself, were the chance to be in <em>his</em> favour), we both agreed to defer the decision till tomorrow, and to leave the whole about the surgeon to the management of our two valets; enjoining them absolute secrecy: and so rode back again by different ways.</p>
				<p>We fixed upon a little lone valley for the spot⁠—ten tomorrow morning the time⁠—and single rapier the word. Yet I repeatedly told him, that I valued myself so much upon my skill in that weapon, that I would wish him to choose any other.</p>
				<p>He said it was a gentleman’s weapon; and he who understood it not, wanted a qualification that he ought to suffer for not having: but that, as to him, one weapon was as good as another, throughout all the instruments of offence.</p>
				<p>So, Jack, you see I take no advantage of him: but my devil must deceive me, if he take not his life or his death at my hands before eleven tomorrow morning.</p>
				<p>His valet and mine are to be present; but both strictly enjoined to be impartial and inactive: and, in return for my civility of the like nature, he commanded <em>his</em> to be assisting me, if he fell.</p>
				<p>We are to ride thither, and to dismount when at the place; and his footman and mine are to wait at an appointed distance, with a chaise to carry off to the borders of the Venetian territories the survivor, if one drop; or to assist either or both, as occasion may demand.</p>
				<p>And thus, Belford, is the matter settled.</p>
				<p>A shower of rain has left me nothing else to do; and therefore I write this letter; though I might as well have deferred it till tomorrow twelve o’clock, when I doubt not to be able to write again, to assure you much I am</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Yours, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Lovelace.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
