<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 311: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-311" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">311</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, <time datetime="07-06">July 6</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>Few young persons have been able to give more convincing proofs than myself how little true happiness lies in the enjoyment of our own wishes.</p>
				<p>To produce one instance only of the truth of this observation; what would I have given for weeks past, for the favour of a letter from my dear Miss Howe, in whose friendship I placed all my remaining comfort! Little did I think, that the next letter she would honour me with, should be in such a style, as should make me look more than once at the subscription, that I might be sure (the name not being written at length) that it was not signed by another <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. H.</abbr> For surely, thought I, this is my sister Arabella’s style: surely Miss Howe (blame me as she pleases in other points) could never repeat so <em>sharply</em> upon her friend, words written in the bitterness of spirit, and in the disorder of head; nor remind her, with asperity, and with mingled strokes of wit, of an argument held in the gaiety of a heart elated with prosperous fortunes, (as mine then was), and very little apprehensive of the severe turn that argument would one day take against herself.</p>
				<p>But what have <em>I</em>, sink in my fortunes; my character forfeited; my honour lost, (while <em>I</em> know it, I care not <em>who</em> knows it); destitute of friends, and even of hope; what have <em>I</em> to do to show a spirit of repining and expostulation to a dear friend, because she is not <em>more</em> kind than a sister?⁠—</p>
				<p>You have till now, my dear, treated me with great indulgence. If it was with greater than I had <em>deserved</em>, I may be to blame to have built upon it, on the consciousness that I <em>deserve</em> it now <em>as much as ever</em>. But I find, by the rising bitterness which will mingle with the gall in my ink, that I am not yet subdued enough to my condition.⁠—I lay down my pen for one moment.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Pardon me, my Miss Howe. I have recollected myself: and will endeavour to give a particular answer to your letter; although it will take me up too much time to think of sending it by your messenger tomorrow: he can put off his journey, he says, till Saturday. I will endeavour to have the whole narrative ready for you by Saturday.</p>
				<p>But how to defend myself in everything that has happened, I cannot tell: since in some part of the time, in which my conduct appears to have been censurable, I was not myself; and to this hour know not all the methods taken to deceive and ruin me.</p>
				<p>You tell me, that in your first letter you gave me such an account of the vile house I was in, and such cautions about that Tomlinson, as made you wonder how I could think of going back.</p>
				<p>Alas, my dear! I was tricked, most vilely tricked back, as you shall hear in its place.</p>
				<p>Without <em>knowing</em> the house was so very <em>vile</em> a house from your <em>intended</em> information, I disliked the people too much, <em>ever voluntarily</em> to have returned to it. But had you really written such cautions about Tomlinson, and the house, as you seem to have <em>purposed</em> to do, they must, had they come in time, have been of infinite service to me. But not one word of either, whatever was your <em>intention</em>, did you mention to me, in that <em>first</em> of the <em>three</em> letters you so warmly <strong>tell</strong> me you <em>did</em> send me. <em>I will enclose it to convince you.</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-270" id="noteref-270" epub:type="noteref">270</a></p>
				<p>But your account of your messenger’s delivering to me your second letter, and the description he gives of me, as <q>lying upon a couch, in a strange way, bloated, and flush-coloured; you don’t know how</q>, absolutely puzzles and confounds me.</p>
				<p>Lord have mercy upon the poor Clarissa Harlowe! What can this mean!⁠—<em>Who</em> was the messenger you sent? Was <em>he</em> one of Lovelace’s creatures too!⁠—Could nobody come near me but that man’s confederates, either <em>setting out</em> so, or <em>made so</em>? I know not what to make of any one syllable of this! Indeed I don’t.</p>
				<p>Let me see. You say, this was <em>before</em> I went from Hampstead! My intellects had not then been touched!⁠—nor had I ever been surprised by wine, (strange if I had!): How then could I be found in such a <q>strange way, bloated and flush-coloured; you don’t know how</q>!⁠—Yet what a vile, what a hateful figure has your messenger represented me to have made!</p>
				<p>But indeed I know nothing of any messenger from you.</p>
				<p>Believing myself secure at Hampstead, I stayed longer there than I would have done, in hopes of the letter promised me in your short one of the <time datetime="06-09">9th</time>, brought me by my own messenger, in which you undertake to send for and engage <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Townsend in my favour.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-271" id="noteref-271" epub:type="noteref">271</a></p>
				<p>I wondered I had not heard from you: and was told you were sick; and, at another time, that your mother and you had had words on my account, and that you had refused to admit <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hickman’s visits upon it: so that I supposed, at one time, that you were not <em>able</em> to write; at another, that your mother’s prohibition had its <em>due</em> force with you. But now I have no doubt that the wicked man must have intercepted your letter; and I wish he found not means to <em>corrupt your messenger</em> to tell you so strange a story.</p>
				<p>It was on <time datetime="06-11">Sunday, June 11</time>, you say, that the man gave it me. I was at church twice that day with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moore. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace was at her house the while, where he boarded, and wanted to have lodged; but I would not permit that, though I could not help the other. In one of these spaces <em>it must be</em> that he had time to work upon the man. You’ll easily, my dear, find that out, by inquiring the time of his arrival at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Moore’s and other circumstances of the <em>strange way</em> he pretended to see me in, <em>on a couch</em>, and the rest.</p>
				<p>Had anybody seen me afterwards, when I was betrayed back to the vile house, struggling under the operation of wicked potions, and robbed <em>indeed</em> of my intellects (for this, as you shall hear, was my dreadful case), I might then, perhaps, have appeared <q>bloated</q> and <q>flush-coloured</q>, and <q>I know not how myself</q>. But were you to see your poor Clarissa, <em>now</em> (or even to have seen her at Hampstead <em>before</em> she suffered the vilest of all outrages), you would not think her <q>bloated</q> or <q>flush-coloured</q>: indeed you would not.</p>
				<p>In a word, it could not be <em>me</em> your messenger saw; nor (if anybody) who it was can I divine.</p>
				<p>I will now, as <em>briefly</em> as the subject will permit, enter into the darker part of my sad story: and yet I must be somewhat circumstantial, that you may not think me capable of <em>reserve</em> or <em>palliation</em>. The <em>latter</em> I am not conscious that I need. I should be utterly inexcusable were I guilty of the <em>former</em> to you. And yet, if you know how my heart sinks under the thoughts of a recollection so painful, you would pity me.</p>
				<p>As I shall not be able, perhaps, to conclude what I have to write in even two or three letters, I will begin a new one with my story; and send the whole of it together, although written at different periods, as I am able.</p>
				<p>Allow me a little pause, my dear, at this place; and to subscribe myself</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your ever affectionate and obliged,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
