<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 120: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-120" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">120</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sat. Afternoon</p>
				</header>
				<p>I detain your messenger while I write an answer to yours; the poor old man not being very well.</p>
				<p>You dishearten me a good deal about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. I may be too willing from my sad circumstances to think the best of him. If his pretences to reformation are <em>but</em> pretences, what must be his intent? But can the heart of man be so very vile? Can he, <em>dare</em> he, mock the Almighty? But I may not, from one very sad reflection, think better of him; that I am thrown too much into his power, to make it <em>necessary</em> for him (except he were to intend the <em>very utmost</em> villany by me) to be such a shocking hypocrite? He must, at least be in earnest at the <em>time</em> he gives the better hopes. Surely he must. You yourself must join with me in this hope, or you could not wish me to be so dreadfully yoked.</p>
				<p>But after all, I had rather, much rather, be independent of him, and of his family, although I have an high opinion of them; at least till I see what my own may be brought to.⁠—Otherwise, I think, it were best for me, at once, to cast myself into Lady Betty’s protection. All would then be conducted with decency, and perhaps many mortifications would be spared me. But then I must be <em>his</em>, at all adventures, and be thought to defy my own family. And shall I not first see the issue of <em>one</em> application? And yet I cannot make this, till I am settled somewhere, and at a distance from him.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sorlings showed me a letter this morning, which she had received from her sister Greme last night; in which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Greme (hoping I would forgive her forward zeal if her sister thinks fit to show her letter to me) “wishes (and that for all the noble family’s sake, and she hopes she may say for my own) that I will be pleased to yield to make his honour, as she calls him, happy.” She grounds her <q>officiousness</q>, as she calls it, upon what he was so <q>condescending</q> (her word also) to say to her yesterday, in his way to Windsor, on her <q>presuming</q> to ask, if she might soon give him joy? “That no man ever loved a woman as he loves me: that no woman ever so well deserved to be beloved: that he loves me with such a purity as he had never believed himself capable of, or that a mortal creature could have inspired him with; looking upon me as all <em>soul</em>; as an angel sent down to save <em>his</em>;” and a great deal more of this sort: “but that he apprehends my consent to make him happy is at a greater distance than he wishes; and complained of too severe restrictions I had laid upon him before I honoured him with my <em>confidence</em>: which restrictions <q>must be as sacred to him, as if they were parts of the marriage contract</q>,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				<p>What, my dear, shall I say to this? How shall I take it? <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Greme is a good woman. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sorlings is a good woman. And this letter agrees with the conversation between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace and me, which I thought, and still think, so agreeable.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-86" id="noteref-86" epub:type="noteref">86</a> Yet what means the man by <em>foregoing the opportunities he has had to declare himself</em>?⁠—What mean his <em>complaints of my restrictions</em> to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Greme? He is not a bashful man.⁠—But you say, I inspire people with an awe of me.⁠—An awe, my dear!⁠—As how?</p>
				<p>I am quite petulant, fretful, and peevish, with myself, at times, to find that I am bound to see the workings of the <em>subtle</em>, or this <em>giddy</em> spirit, which shall I call it?</p>
				<p>How am I punished, as I frequently think, for my vanity, in hoping to be an <em>example</em> to young persons of my sex! Let me be but a <em>warning</em>, and I will now be contented. For, be my destiny what it may, I shall never be able to hold up my head again among my best friends and worthiest companions.</p>
				<p>It is one of the cruelest circumstances that attends the faults of the inconsiderate, that she makes all who love her unhappy, and gives joy only to her own enemies, and to the enemies of her family.</p>
				<p>What an useful lesson would this afford, were it properly inculcated at the time that the <em>tempted mind</em> was balancing upon a doubtful adventure?</p>
				<p>You know not, my dear, the worth of a virtuous man; and, noble-minded as you are in most particulars, you partake of the common weakness of human nature, in being apt to slight what is in your own power.</p>
				<p>You would not think of using <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, were he your suitor, as you do the much worthier <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman⁠—would you?⁠—You know who says in my mother’s case, “Much <em>will</em> bear, much <em>shall</em> bear, all the world through.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-87" id="noteref-87" epub:type="noteref">87</a> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman, I fancy, would be glad to know the lady’s name, who made such an observation. He would think it hardly possible, but such a one should benefit by her own remark; and would be apt to wish his Miss Howe acquainted with her.</p>
				<p>Gentleness of heart, surely, is not despicable in a man. Why, if it be, is the highest distinction a man can arrive at, that of a <em>gentleman</em>?⁠—A distinction which a prince may not deserve. For manners, more than birth, fortune, or title, are requisite in this character. Manners are indeed the essence of it. And shall it be generally said, and Miss Howe not be an exception to it (as you once wrote), that our sex are best dealt with by boisterous and unruly spirits?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref-88" epub:type="noteref">88</a></p>
				<p>Forgive me, my dear, and love me as you used to do. For although my fortunes are changed, my heart is not: Nor ever will, while it bids my pen tell you, that it must cease to bear, when it is not as much yours as</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
