<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 413: Mr. Belford, to Robert Lovelace, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-413" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">413</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Robert Lovelace, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, <time datetime="08-17"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 17</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>I am sincerely rejoiced to hear that thou art already so much amended, as thy servant tells me thou art. Thy letter looks as if thy morals were mending with thy health. This was a letter I <em>could</em> show, as I <em>did</em>, to the lady.</p>
				<p>She is very ill: (cursed letters received from her implacable family!) so I could not have much conversation with her, in thy favour, upon it.⁠—But what passed will make thee more and more adore her.</p>
				<p>She was very attentive to me, as I read it; and, when I had done, Poor man! said she; what a letter is this! He had timely instances that my temper was not ungenerous, if generosity could have obliged him! But his remorse, and that for <em>his own</em> sake, is all the punishment I wish him.⁠—Yet I must be more reserved, if you write to him everything I say!</p>
				<p>I extolled her unbounded goodness⁠—how could I help it, though to her face!</p>
				<p>No goodness in it! she said⁠—it was a frame of mind she had endeavoured after for <em>her own sake</em>. She suffered too much in want of mercy, not to wish it to a penitent heart. He <em>seems</em> to be penitent, said she; and it is not for me to judge beyond appearances.⁠—If he be not, he deceives himself more than anybody else.</p>
				<p>She was so ill that this was all that passed on the occasion.</p>
				<p>What a fine subject for tragedy, would the injuries of this lady, and her behaviour under them, both with regard to her implacable friends, and to her persecutor, make! With a grand objection as to the moral, nevertheless;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-333" id="noteref-333" epub:type="noteref">333</a> for here virtue is punished! Except indeed we look forward to the rewards of <b>Hereafter</b>, which, morally, <em>she</em> must be sure of, or who can? Yet, after all, I know not, so sad a fellow art thou, and so vile an husband mightest thou have made, whether her virtue is not rewarded in missing thee: for things the most grievous to human nature, when they happen, as this charming creature once observed, are often the happiest for us in the event.</p>
				<p>I have frequently thought, in my attendance on this lady, that if Belton’s admired author, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Nic.</abbr> Rowe, had had such a character before him, he would have drawn another sort of penitent than he <em>has</em> done, or given his play, which he calls <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Fair Penitent</i>, a fitter title. Miss Harlowe is a penitent indeed! I think, if I am not guilty of a contradiction in terms; a penitent without a fault; her parents’ conduct towards her from the first considered.</p>
				<p>The whole story of the other is a pack of d⁠⸺⁠d stuff. Lothario, ’tis true, seems such another wicked ungenerous varlet as thou knowest who: the author knew how to draw a rake; but not to paint a penitent. Calista is a desiring luscious wench, and her penitence is nothing else but rage, insolence, and scorn. Her passions are all storm and tumult; nothing of the finer passions of the sex, which, if naturally drawn, will distinguish themselves from the masculine passions, by a softness that will even shine through rage and despair. Her character is made up of deceit and disguise. She has no virtue; is all pride; and her devil is as much <em>within</em> her, as <em>without</em> her.</p>
				<p>How then can the fall of such a one create a proper distress, when all the circumstances of it are considered? For does she not brazen out her crime, even after detection? Knowing her own guilt, she calls for Altamont’s vengeance on his best friend, as if he had traduced her; yields to marry Altamont, though criminal with another; and actually beds that whining puppy, when she had given up herself, body and soul, to Lothario; who, nevertheless, refused to marry her.</p>
				<p>Her penitence, when begun, she justly styles <q>the frenzy of her soul</q>; and, as I said, after having, as long as she could, most audaciously brazened out her crime, and done all the mischief she could do, (occasioning the death of Lothario, of her father, and others), she stabs herself.</p>
				<p>And can this be the act of penitence?</p>
				<p>But, indeed, our poets hardly know how to create a distress without horror, murder, and suicide; and must shock your soul, to bring tears from your eyes.</p>
				<p>Altamont indeed, who is an amorous blockhead, a credulous cuckold, and, (though painted as a brave fellow, and a soldier), a mere Tom Essence, and a quarreler with his best friend, dies like a fool, (as we are led to suppose at the conclusion of the play), without either sword or popgun, of mere grief and nonsense for one of the vilest of her sex: but the <q>Fair Penitent</q>, as she is called, perishes by her own hand; and, having no title by her past crimes to <em>laudable</em> pity, forfeits all claim to <em>true</em> penitence, and, in all probability, to future mercy.</p>
				<p>But here is Miss <strong>Clarissa Harlowe</strong>, a virtuous, noble, wise, and pious young lady; who being ill used by her friends, and unhappily ensnared by a vile libertine, whom she believes to be a man of honour, is in a manner <em>forced</em> to throw herself upon his protection. And he, in order to obtain her confidence, never scruples the deepest and most solemn protestations of honour.</p>
				<p>After a series of plots and contrivances, all baffled by her virtue and vigilance, he basely has recourse to the vilest of arts, and, to rob her of her honour, is forced first to rob her of her senses.</p>
				<p>Unable to bring her, notwithstanding, to his ungenerous views of cohabitation, she overawes him in the very entrance of a fresh act of premeditated guilt, in presence of the most abandoned of women assembled to assist his devilish purpose; triumphs over them all, by virtue only of her innocence; and escapes from the vile hands he had put her into.</p>
				<p>She nobly, not franticly, resents: refuses to see or to marry the wretch; who, repenting his usage of so divine a creature, would fain move her to forgive his baseness, and make him her husband: and this, though persecuted by all her friends, and abandoned to the deepest distress, being obliged, from ample fortunes, to make away with her apparel for subsistence; surrounded also by strangers, and forced (in want of others) to make a friend of the friend of her seducer.</p>
				<p>Though longing for death, and making all proper preparations for it, convinced that grief and ill usage have broken her noble heart, she abhors the impious thought of shortening her allotted period; and, as much a stranger to revenge as despair, is able to forgive the author of her ruin; wishes his repentance, and that she may be the last victim to his barbarous perfidy: and is solicitous for nothing so much in this life, as to prevent vindictive mischief <em>to</em> and <em>from</em> the man who used her so basely.</p>
				<p>This is penitence! This is piety! And hence distress naturally arises, that must <em>worthily</em> effect every heart.</p>
				<p>Whatever the ill usage of this excellent woman is from her relations, she breaks not out into excesses: she strives, on the contrary, to find reason to justify them at her own expense; and seems more concerned for their cruelty to her for their sakes hereafter, when she shall be no more, than for her own: for, as to herself, she is sure, she says, God will forgive her, though no one on earth will.</p>
				<p>On every extraordinary provocation she has recourse to the Scriptures, and endeavours to regulate her vehemence by sacred precedents. “Better people, she says, have been more afflicted than she, grievous as she sometimes thinks her afflictions: and shall she not bear what less faulty persons have borne?” On the very occasion I have mentioned, (some new instances of implacableness from her friends), the enclosed meditation will show how mildly, and yet how forcibly, she complains. See if thou, in the wicked levity of thy heart, canst apply it to thy cause, as thou didst the other. If thou canst not, give way to thy conscience, and that will make the properest application.</p>
				<blockquote class="meditation">
					<header>
						<p>Meditation</p>
					</header>
					<p>How long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words!</p>
					<p>Be it indeed that I have erred, mine error remaineth with myself.</p>
					<p>To her that is afflicted, pity should be shown from her friend.</p>
					<p>But she that is ready to slip with her feet, is as a lamp despised in the thought of them that are at ease.</p>
					<p>There is a shame which bringeth sin, and there is a shame which bringeth glory and grace.</p>
					<p>Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye, my friends! for the hand of God hath touched me.</p>
					<p>If your soul were in my soul’s stead, I also could speak as ye do: I could heap up words against you⁠—</p>
					<p>But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should assuage your grief.</p>
					<p>Why will ye break a leaf driven to and fro? Why will ye pursue the dry stubble? Why will ye write bitter words against me, and make me possess the iniquities of my youth?</p>
					<p>Mercy is seasonable in the time of affliction, as clouds of rain in the time of drought.</p>
					<p>Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me alone, that I may take comfort a little⁠—before I go whence I shall not return; even to the land of darkness, and shadow of death!</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Let me add, that the excellent lady is informed, by a letter from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Norton, that Colonel Morden is just arrived in England. He is now the only person she wishes to see.</p>
				<p>I expressed some jealousy upon it, lest he should have place given over me in the executorship. She said, That she had no thoughts to do so now; because such a trust, were he to accept of it, (which she doubted), might, from the nature of some of the papers which in that case would necessarily pass through his hands, occasion mischiefs between my friend and him, that would be worse than death for her to think of.</p>
				<p>Poor Belton, I hear, is at death’s door. A messenger is just come from him, who tells me he cannot die till he sees me. I hope the poor fellow will not go off yet; since neither his affairs of this world, nor for the other, are in tolerable order. I cannot avoid going to the poor man. Yet am unwilling to stir, till I have an assurance from you that you will not disturb the lady: for I know he will be very loth to part with me, when he gets me to him.</p>
				<p>Tourville tells me how fast thou mendest: let me conjure thee not to think of molesting this incomparable woman. For thy own sake I request this, as well as for hers, and for the sake of thy given promise: for, should she die within a few weeks, as I fear she will, it will be said, and perhaps too justly, that thy visit has hastened her end.</p>
				<p>In hopes thou wilt not, I wish thy perfect recovery: else that thou mayest relapse, and be confined to thy bed.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
