<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 193: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-193" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">193</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Saturday, <time datetime="05-20">May 20</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>I am pleased with the sober reflection with which thou concludest thy last; and I thank thee for it. Poor Belton!⁠—I did not think his Thomasine would have proved so very a devil. But this must everlastingly be the risk of a keeper, who takes up with a lowbred girl. This I never did. Nor had I occasion to do it. Such a one as <em>I</em>, Jack, needed only, till now, to shake the stateliest tree, and the mellowed fruit dropped into my mouth:⁠—always of Montaigne’s taste thou knowest:⁠—thought it a glory to subdue a girl of family.⁠—More truly delightful to me the seduction-progress than the crowned act: for that’s a vapour, a bubble! and most cordially do I thank thee for thy indirect hint, that I am right in my pursuit.</p>
				<p>From such a woman as Miss Harlowe, a man is secured from all the inconveniencies thou expatiatest upon.</p>
				<p>Once more, therefore, do I thank thee, Belford, for thy approbation!⁠—A man need not, as thou sayest, sneak into <em>holes</em> and <em>corners</em>, and shun the day, in the company of such a <q>woman as this</q>. How friendly in thee, thus to abet the favourite purpose of my heart!⁠—nor can it be a disgrace to me, to permit <q>such a lady</q> to be called by my name!⁠—nor shall I be at all concerned about the <q>world’s censure</q>, if I live to the <q>years of discretion</q>, which thou mentionest, should I be taken in, and prevailed upon to tread with her the good old path of my ancestors.</p>
				<p>A blessing on thy heart, thou honest fellow! I <em>thought</em> thou wert in jest, and but acquitting thyself of an engagement to Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> when thou wert pleading for matrimony in behalf of this lady!⁠—It could not be principle, I knew, in thee: it could not be compassion⁠—a little <em>envy</em> indeed I suspected!⁠—But now I see thee once more thyself: and once more, say I, a blessing on thy heart, thou true friend, and very honest fellow!</p>
				<p>Now will I proceed with courage in all my schemes, and oblige thee with the continued narrative of my progressions towards bringing them to effect!⁠—but I could not forbear to interrupt my story, to show my gratitude.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
