<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 409: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Mrs. Norton</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-409" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">409</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Norton</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, <time datetime="08-27"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 27</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>What <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brand, or anybody, can have written or said to my prejudice, I cannot imagine; and yet some evil reports have gone out against me; as I find by some hints in a very severe letter written to me by my uncle Antony. Such a letter as I believe was never written to any poor creature, who, by ill health of body, as well as of mind, was before tottering on the brink of the grave. But my friends may possibly be better justified than the reporters⁠—For who knows what they may have heard?</p>
				<p>You give me a kind caution, which seems to imply <em>more</em> than you express, when you advise me against countenancing visitors that may discredit me. You have spoken quite out. Surely, I have had afflictions enough to strengthen my mind, and to enable it to bear the worst that can now happen. But I will not puzzle myself by <em>conjectural evils</em>; as I <em>might</em> perhaps do, if I had not enough that were <em>certain</em>. I shall hear all, when it is thought proper that I should. Meantime, let me say, for <em>your</em> satisfaction, that I know not that I have anything criminal or disreputable to answer for either in word or deed, since the fatal <time datetime="04-10">10th of April</time> last.</p>
				<p>You desire an account of what passes between me and my friends; and also particulars or brief heads of my sad story, in order to serve me as occasion shall offer. My dear good <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Norton, you shall have a whole packet of papers, which I have sent to my Miss Howe, when she returns them; and you shall have likewise another packet, (and that with this letter), which I cannot at present think of sending to that dear friend for the sake of <em>my own relations</em>; whom, without seeing that packet, she is but too ready to censure heavily. From these you will be able to collect a great deal of my story. But for what is previous to these papers, and which more particularly relates to what I have suffered from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, you must have patience; for at present I have neither head nor heart for such subjects. The papers I send you with this will be those mentioned in the margin.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-328" id="noteref-328" epub:type="noteref">328</a> You must restore them to me as soon as perused; and upon your honour make no use of them, or of any intelligence you have from me, but by my previous consent.</p>
				<p>These communications you must not, my good <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Norton, look upon as appeals against my relations. On the contrary, I am heartily sorry that they have incurred the displeasure of so excellent a divine as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Lewen. But you desire to have everything before you: and I think you <em>ought</em>; for who knows, as you say, but you may be applied to at last to administer comfort from their conceding hearts, to one that wants it; and who sometimes, judging by what she knows of her own heart, thinks herself entitled to it?</p>
				<p>I know that I have a most indulgent and sweet-tempered mother; but, having to deal with violent spirits, she has too often forfeited that peace of mind which she so much prefers, by her over concern to preserve it.</p>
				<p>I am sure she would not have turned me over for an answer to a letter written with so contrite and fervent a spirit, as was mine to her, to a <em>masculine</em> spirit, had she been left to herself.</p>
				<p>But, my dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Norton, might not, think you, the revered lady have favoured me with one <em>private</em> line?⁠—If not, might not <em>you</em> have written by her order, or connivance, one softening, one <em>motherly</em> line, when she saw her poor girl, whom once she dearly loved, borne so hard upon?</p>
				<p>O no, she might not!⁠—because her heart, to be sure, is in their measures! and if <em>she</em> think them right, perhaps they <em>must be right</em>!⁠—at least, knowing only what <em>they</em> know, they must!⁠—and yet they <em>might</em> know all, if they would!⁠—and possibly, in their own good time, they think to make proper inquiry.⁠—My application was made to them but <em>lately</em>.⁠—Yet how deeply will it afflict them, if <em>their</em> time should be <em>out of time</em>!</p>
				<p>When you have before you the letters I have sent to Miss Howe, you will see that Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> and the Ladies of his family, jealous as they are of the honour of <em>their house</em>, (to express myself in their language), think better of me than my own relations do. You will see an instance of their generosity to me, which at the time extremely affected me, and indeed still affects me. Unhappy man! gay, inconsiderate, and cruel! what has been his gain by making unhappy a creature who hoped to make him happy! and who was determined to deserve the love of all to whom he is related!⁠—Poor man!⁠—but you will mistake a compassionate and placable nature for love!⁠—he took care, great care, that I should rein-in betimes any passion that I might have had for him, had he known how to be but commonly grateful or generous!⁠—But the Almighty knows what is best for his poor creatures.</p>
				<p>Some of the letters in the same packet will also let you into the knowledge of a strange step which I have taken, (strange you will think it); and, at the same time, give you my reasons for taking it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-329" id="noteref-329" epub:type="noteref">329</a></p>
				<p>It must be expected, that situations uncommonly difficult will make necessary some extraordinary steps, which, but for those situations, would be hardly excusable. It will be very happy indeed, and somewhat wonderful, if all the measures I have been driven to take should be right. A pure intention, void of all undutiful resentment, is what must be my consolation, whatever others may think of those measures, when they come to know them: which, however, will hardly be till it is out of my power to justify them, or to answer for myself.</p>
				<p>I am glad to hear of my cousin Morden’s safe arrival. I should wish to see him methinks: but I am afraid that he will sail with the stream; as it must be expected, that he will hear what they have to say first.⁠—But what I most fear is, that he will take upon himself to avenge me. Rather than he should do so, I would have him look upon me as a creature utterly unworthy of his concern; at least of his <em>vindictive</em> concern.</p>
				<p>How soothing to the wounded heart of your Clarissa, how balmy are the assurances of your continued love and favour;⁠—love me, my dear mamma Norton, continue to love me, to the end!⁠—I now think that I may, without presumption, promise to <em>deserve</em> your love to the end. And, when I am gone, cherish my memory in your worthy heart; for in so doing you will cherish the memory of one who loves and honours you more than she can express.</p>
				<p>But when I am no more, I charge you, as soon as you can, the smarting pangs of grief that will attend a recent loss; and let all be early turned into that sweetly melancholy regard to <strong>memory</strong>, which, engaging us to forget all faults, and to remember nothing but what was thought amiable, gives more pleasure than pain to survivors⁠—especially if they can comfort themselves with the humble hope, that the Divine mercy has taken the dear departed to itself.</p>
				<p>And what is the space of time to look backward upon, between an early departure and the longest survivance!⁠—and what the consolation attending the sweet hope of meeting again, never more to be separated, never more to be pained, grieved, or aspersed;⁠—but mutually blessing, and being blessed, to all eternity!</p>
				<p>In the contemplation of this happy state, in which I hope, in God’s good time, to rejoice with you, my beloved <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Norton, and also with my dear relations, all reconciled to, and blessing the child against whom they are now so much incensed, I conclude myself</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your ever dutiful and affectionate</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
