<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 342: Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-342" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">342</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Howe, to Miss Clarissa Harlowe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday <abbr>Morn.</abbr> <time datetime="06-20">July 20</time><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-287" id="noteref-287" epub:type="noteref">287</a></p>
				</header>
				<p>What, my dearest creature, have been your sufferings!⁠—What must have been your anguish on so disgraceful an insult, committed in the open streets, and in the broad day!</p>
				<p>No end, I think, of the undeserved calamities of a dear soul, who had been so unhappily driven and betrayed into the hands of a vile libertine!⁠—How was I shocked at the receiving of your letter written by another hand, and only dictated by you!⁠—You must be very ill. Nor is it to be wondered at. But I hope it is rather from hurry, and surprise, and lowness, which <em>may</em> be overcome, than from a grief given way to, which may be attended with effects I cannot bear to think of.</p>
				<p>But whatever you do, my dear, you must not despond! Indeed you must not despond! Hitherto you have been in no fault: but despair would be all your own: and the worst fault you can be guilty of.</p>
				<p>I cannot bear to look upon another hand instead of yours. My dear creature, send me a few lines, though <em>ever so few</em>, in your own hand, if possible.⁠—For they will revive my heart; especially if they can acquaint me of your amended health.</p>
				<p>I expect your answer to my letter of the <time datetime="07-13">13th</time>. We all expect it with impatience.</p>
				<p>His relations are persons of <em>so much</em> honour⁠—they are <em>so very</em> earnest to rank you among them⁠—the wretch is so very penitent: <em>every one of his</em> family says he is⁠—<em>your own</em> are so implacable⁠—your last distress, though the consequence of his former villany, yet neither brought on by his direction nor with his knowledge; and so much resented by him⁠—that my mother is absolutely of opinion that <em>you should be his</em>⁠—especially if, yielding to my wishes, as expressed in my letter, and those of all his friends, you <em>would</em> have complied, had it not been for this horrid arrest.</p>
				<p>I will enclose the copy of the letter I wrote to Miss Montague last Tuesday, on hearing that nobody knew what was become of you; and the answer to it, underwritten and signed by Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>, Lady Sarah Sadleir, and Lady Betty Lawrance, as well as by the young Ladies; and also by the wretch himself.</p>
				<p>I own, that I like not the turn of what he has written to me; and, before I will further interest myself in his favour, I have determined to inform myself, <em>by a friend</em>, from his own mouth, of his sincerity, and whether his <em>whole inclination</em> be, in his request to me, exclusive of the <em>wishes of his relations</em>. Yet my heart rises against him, on the supposition that there is the shadow of a reason for such a question, the woman Miss Clarissa Harlowe. But I think, with my mother, that marriage is now the only means left to make your future life tolerably easy⁠—<em>happy</em> there is no saying.⁠—His disgraces, in <em>that</em> case, in the eye of the world itself, will be more than yours: and, to those who know you, glorious will be your triumph.</p>
				<p>I am obliged to accompany my mother soon to the Isle of Wight. My aunt Harman is in a declining way, and insists upon seeing us both⁠—and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hickman too, I think.</p>
				<p>His sister, of whom we had heard so much, with her lord, were brought t’other day to visit us. She strangely likes me, or says she does.</p>
				<p>I can’t say but that I think she answers the excellent character we heard of her.</p>
				<p>It would be death to me to set out for the little island, and not see you first: and yet my mother (fond of exerting an authority that she herself, by that exertion, often brings into question) insists, that my next visit to you <em>must</em> be a congratulatory one as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lovelace.</p>
				<p>When I know what will be the result of the questions to be put in my name to that wretch, and what is your mind on my letter of the <time datetime="07-13">13th</time>, I shall tell you more of mine.</p>
				<p>The bearer promises to make so much dispatch as to attend you this very afternoon. May he return with good tidings to</p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your ever affectionate</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Anna Howe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
