<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 305: Mrs. Hodges</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-305" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">305</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hodges</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p class="explanatory">[In answer]</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sat. <time datetime="07-02">July 2</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>Maddam,</p>
				<p>I return you an anser, as you wish me to doe. Master is acquented with no sitch man. I am shure no sitch ever came to our house. And master sturs very little out. He has no harte to stur out. For why? Your obstinacy makes um not care to see one another. Master’s birthday never was kept soe before: for not a sole heere: and nothing but sikeing and sorrowin from master to think how it yused to bee.</p>
				<p>I axed master, if soe bee he knowed sitch a man as one Captain Tomlinson? but said not whirfor I axed. He sed, No, not he.</p>
				<p>Shure this is no trix nor forgery bruing against master by one Tomlinson⁠—Won knows not what company you may have been forsed to keep, sen you went away, you knoe, Maddam; but Lundon is a pestilent plase; and that ’Squire Luvless is a devil (for all he is sitch a like gentleman to look to) as I hev herd every boddy say; and think as how you have found by thiss.</p>
				<p>I truste, Maddam, you wulde not let master cum to harme, if you knoed it, by anybody who may pretend to be acquented with him: but for fere, I querid with myself if I shulde not tell him. But I was willin to show you, that I wulde plessure you in advarsity, if advarsity be your lott, as well as prosperity; for I am none of those that woulde doe otherwiss. Soe no more from</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your humble sarvent, to wish you well,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Sarah Hodges.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
