<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 186: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-186" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">186</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday Night, <time datetime="05-16">May 16</time></p>
				</header>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace has sent me, by Dorcas, his proposals, as follow:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>“To spare a delicacy so extreme, and to obey you, I write: and the rather that you may communicate this paper to Miss Howe, who may consult any of her friends you shall think proper to have <em>entrusted</em> on this occasion. I say entrusted; because, as you know, I have given it out to several persons, that we are actually married.</p>
					<p>“In the first place, Madam, I offer to settle upon you, by way of jointure, your whole estate: and moreover to vest in trustees such a part of mine in Lancashire, as shall produce a clear four hundred pounds a year, to be paid to your sole and separate use quarterly.</p>
					<p>“My own estate is a clear not nominnal £2,000 per annum. Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> proposes to give me possession either of that which he has in Lancashire, (to which, by the way, I think I have a better title than he has himself), or that we call ‘The Lawn,’ in Hertfordshire, upon my nuptials with a lady whom he so greatly admires; and to make that I shall choose a clear £1,000 per annum.</p>
					<p>“My too great contempt of censure has subjected me to much slander. It may not therefore be improper to assure you, on the word of a gentleman, that no part of my estate was ever mortgaged: and that although I lived very expensively abroad, and made large draughts, yet that Midsummer-day next will discharge all that I owe in the world. My notions are not all bad ones. I have been thought, in pecuniary cases, <em>generous</em>. It would have deserved <em>another</em> name, had I not first been <em>just</em>.</p>
					<p>“If, as your own estate is at present in your father’s hands, you rather choose that I should make a jointure out of mine, tantamount to yours, be it what it will, it shall be done. I will engage Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> to write to <em>you</em>, what he proposes to do on the happy occasion: not as your desire or expectation, but to demonstrate, that no advantage is intended to be taken of the situation you are in with your own family.</p>
					<p>“To show the beloved daughter the consideration I have for her, I will consent that she shall prescribe the terms of agreement in relation to the large sums, which must be in her father’s hands, arising from her grandfather’s estate. I have no doubt, but he will be put upon making large demands upon you. All those it shall be in your power to comply with, for the sake of your own peace. And the remainder shall be paid into your hands, and be entirely at your disposal, as a fund to support those charitable donations, which I have heard you so famed for <em>out</em> of your family, and for which you have been so greatly reflected upon <em>in</em> it.</p>
					<p>“As to clothes, jewels, and the like, against the time you shall choose to make your appearance, it will be my pride that you shall not be beholden for such of these, as shall be answerable to the rank of both, to those who have had the stupid folly to renounce a daughter they deserved not. You must excuse me, Madam: you would mistrust my sincerity in the rest, could I speak of these people without asperity, though so nearly related to you.</p>
					<p>“These, Madam, are my proposals. They are such as I always designed to make, whenever you would permit me to enter into the delightful subject. But you have been so determined to try every method for reconciling yourself to your relations, even by giving me absolutely up forever, that you seemed to think it but justice to keep me at a distance, till the event of that your <em>predominant</em> hope could be seen. It is <em>now</em> seen!⁠—and although I <em>have been</em>, and perhaps still <em>am</em>, ready to regret the want of that preference I wished for from you as Miss Clarissa Harlowe, yet I am sure, as the husband of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lovelace, I shall be more ready to adore than to blame you for the pangs you have given to a heart, the generosity, or rather, the <em>justice</em> of which, my implacable enemies have taught you to doubt: and this still the readier, as I am persuaded that those pangs never would have been given by a mind so noble, had not the doubt been entertained (perhaps with too great an appearance of reason); and as I hope I shall have it to reflect, that the moment the doubt shall be overcome, the indifference will cease.</p>
					<p>“I will only add, that if I have omitted anything, that would have given you farther satisfaction; or if the above terms be short of what you would wish; you will be pleased to supply them as you think fit. And when I know your pleasure, I will instantly order articles to be drawn up comformably, that nothing in my power may be wanting to make you happy.</p>
					<p>“You will now, dearest Madam, judge, how far all the rest depends upon yourself.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>You see, my dear, what he offers. You see it is all my fault, that he has not made these offers before. I am a strange creature!⁠—to be to blame in <em>everything</em>, and to <em>everybody</em>; yet neither intend the ill at the time, nor know it to <em>be</em> the ill too late, or so nearly too late, that I must give up all the delicacy he talks of, to compound for my fault!</p>
				<p><q>I shall now judge how far the rest depends upon myself!</q> So coldly concludes he such warm, and, in the main, unobjectionably proposals: Would you not, as you read, have supposed, that the paper would conclude with the most earnest demand of a day?⁠—I own, I had that expectation so strong, resulting <em>naturally</em>, as I may say, from the premises, that without <em>studying</em> for dissatisfaction, I could not help being dissatisfied when I came to the conclusion.</p>
				<p>But you say there is no help. I must perhaps make <em>further</em> sacrifices. All delicacy it seems is to be at an end with me!⁠—but, if so, this man knows not what every <em>wise</em> man knows, that prudence, and virtue, and delicacy of mind in a <em>wife</em>, do the husband more <em>real</em> honour in the eye of the world, than the same qualities (were <em>she</em> destitute of them) in <em>himself</em>, do him: as the <em>want</em> of them in her does him more <em>dishonour</em>: For are not the wife’s errors the husband’s reproach? how <em>justly</em> his reproach, is another thing.</p>
				<p>I will consider this paper; and write to it, if I am able: for it seems now, <q>all the rest depends upon myself</q>.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
