<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 141: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Mrs. Hervey</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-141" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">141</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hervey</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p class="explanatory">[Enclosed in her last to Miss Howe]</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, <time datetime="04-20">April 20</time></p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Honoured Madam,</p>
				</header>
				<p>Having not had the favour of an answer to a letter I took the liberty to write to you on the 14th, I am in some hopes that it may have miscarried: for I had much rather it should, than to have the mortification to think that my aunt Hervey deemed me unworthy of the honour of her notice.</p>
				<p>In this hope, having kept a copy of it, and not become able to express myself in terms better suited to the unhappy circumstances of things, I transcribe and enclose what I then wrote.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-108" id="noteref-108" epub:type="noteref">108</a> And I humbly beseech you to favour the contents of it with your interest.</p>
				<p>Hitherto it is in my power to perform what I undertake for in this letter; and it would be very grievous to me to be precipitated upon measures, which may render the desirable reconciliation more difficult.</p>
				<p>If, Madam, I were permitted to write to you with the hopes of being answered, I could clear my intention with regard to the step I have taken, although I could not perhaps acquit myself to some of my severest judges, of an imprudence previous to it. You, I am sure, would pity me, if you knew all I could say, and how miserable I am in the forfeiture of the good opinion of all my friends.</p>
				<p>I flatter myself, that <em>their</em> favour is yet retrievable: but, whatever be the determination at Harlowe-place, do not <em>you</em>, my dearest Aunt, deny me the favour of a few lines to inform me if there can be any hope of a reconciliation upon terms less shocking than those heretofore endeavoured to be imposed upon me; or if (which God forbid!) I am to be forever reprobated.</p>
				<p>At least, my dear Aunt, procure for me the justice of my wearing apparel, and the little money and other things which I wrote to my sister for, and mention in the enclosed to you; that I may not be destitute of common conveniencies, or be under a necessity to owe an obligation for such, where, at present, however, I would least of all owe it.</p>
				<p>Allow me to say, that had I <em>designed</em> what happened, I might (as to the money and jewels at least) have saved myself some of the mortification which I have suffered, and which I still further apprehend, if my request be not complied with.</p>
				<p>If you are permitted to encourage an <i xml:lang="fr">eclaircissment</i> of what I hint, I will open my whole heart to you, and inform you of everything.</p>
				<p>If it be any pleasure to have me mortified, be pleased to let it be known, that I am extremely mortified. And yet it is <em>entirely</em> from my own reflections that I am so, having nothing to find fault with in the behaviour of the person from whom every evil was to be apprehended.</p>
				<p>The bearer, having business your way, will bring me your answer on Saturday morning, if you favour me according to my hopes. I knew not that I should have this opportunity till I had written the above.</p>
				<p>I am, my dearest Aunt,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your ever dutiful,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:postscript">Be pleased to direct for me, if I am to be favoured with a few lines, to be left at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Osgood’s, near Soho-square; and nobody shall ever know of your goodness to me, if you desire it to be kept a secret.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
