<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 181: Miss Howe, to Mrs. Judith Norton</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-181" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">181</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Howe, to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Judith Norton</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Saturday Evening, <time datetime="05-13">May 13</time></p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear, Good Woman,</p>
				</header>
				<p>Your beloved’s honour is inviolate!⁠—<em>Must</em> be inviolate! and <em>will</em> be so, in spite of men and devils. Could I have had hope of a reconciliation, all my view was, that she should not have had this man.⁠—All that can be said now, is, she must run the risk of a bad husband: she of whom no man living is worthy!</p>
				<p><em>You</em> pity her mother⁠—so do not <em>I</em>! I pity no mother that puts it out of her power to show maternal love, and humanity, in order to patch up for herself a precarious and sorry quiet, which every blast of wind shall disturb.</p>
				<p>I hate tyrants in every form and shape: but paternal and maternal tyrants are the worst of all: for they can have no bowels.</p>
				<p>I repeat, that I pity <em>none</em> of them. Our beloved friend <em>only</em> deserves pity. She had never been in the hands of this man, but for them. She is quite blameless. You don’t know all her story. Were I to tell you that she had no intention to go off with this man, it would avail her nothing. It would only deserve to condemn, with those who drove her to extremities, <em>him</em> who now must be her refuge. I am</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your sincere friend and servant,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Anna Howe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
