<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 92: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-92" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">92</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline"><abbr>St.</abbr> Alban’s, Tuesday <abbr>Morn.</abbr> Past One</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">O My Dearest Friend!</p>
				</header>
				<p>After what I had resolved upon, as by my former, what shall I write? what <em>can</em> I? with what consciousness, even by <em>letter</em>, do I approach you?⁠—You will soon hear (if already you have not heard from the mouth of common fame) that your Clarissa Harlowe is gone off with a man!</p>
				<p>I am busying myself to give you the particulars at large. The whole twenty-four hours of each day (to begin at the moment I can fix) shall be employed in it till it is finished: every one of the hours, I mean, that will be spared me by this interrupting man, to whom I have made myself so foolishly accountable for too many of them. Rest is departed from me. I have no call for that: and that has no balm for the wounds of my mind. So you’ll have all those hours without interruption till the account is ended.</p>
				<p>But will you receive, shall you be <em>permitted</em> to receive my letters, after what I have done?</p>
				<p>O my dearest friend!⁠—But I must make the best of it.</p>
				<p>I hope that will not be very bad! yet am I convinced that I did a rash and inexcusable thing in meeting him; and all his tenderness, all his vows, cannot pacify my inward reproaches on that account.</p>
				<p>The bearer comes to you, my dear, for the little parcel of linen which I sent you with far better and more agreeable hopes.</p>
				<p>Send not my letters. Send the linen only: except you will favour me with one line, to tell me you love me still; and that you will suspend your censures till you have the whole before you. I am the readier to send thus early, because if you have deposited anything for me, you may cause it to be taken back, or withhold anything you had but intended to send.</p>
				<p>Adieu, my dearest friend!⁠—I beseech you to love me still⁠—But alas! what will your mother say?⁠—what will mine?⁠—what my other relations?⁠—and what my dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Norton?⁠—and how will my brother and sister triumph!</p>
				<p>I cannot at present tell you how, or where, you can direct to me. For very early shall I leave this place; harassed and fatigued to death. But, when I can do nothing else, constant use has made me able to write. Long, very long, has been all my amusement and pleasure: yet could not <em>that</em> have been such to me, had I not had <em>you</em>, my best beloved friend, to write to. Once more adieu. Pity and pray for</p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
