<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 417: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-417" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">417</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday, <time datetime="08-22"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 22</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>I must write on, to divert myself: for I can get no rest; no refreshing rest. I awaked just now in a cursed fright. How a man may be affected by dreams!</p>
				<p>“Methought I had an interview with my beloved. I found her all goodness, condescension, and forgiveness. She suffered herself to be overcome in my favour by the joint intercessions of Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>, Lady Sarah, Lady Betty, and my two cousins Montague, who waited upon her in deep mourning; the ladies in long trains sweeping after them; Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> in a long black mantle trailing after <em>him</em>. They told her they came in these robs to express their sorrow for my sins against her, and to implore her to forgive me.</p>
				<p>“I myself, I thought, was upon my knees, with a sword in my hand, offering either to put it up in the scabbard, or to thrust it into my heart, as she should command the one or the other.</p>
				<p>“At that moment her cousin Morden, I thought, all of a sudden, flashed in through a window, with his drawn sword⁠—Die, Lovelace! said he; this instant die, and be d⁠⸺⁠d, if in earnest thou repairest not by marriage my cousin’s wrongs!</p>
				<p>“I was rising to resent this insult, I thought, when Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> ran between us with his great black mantle, and threw it over my face: and instantly my charmer, with that sweet voice which has so often played upon my ravished ears, wrapped her arms around me, muffled as I was in my Lord’s mantle: O spare, spare my Lovelace! and spare, O Lovelace, my beloved cousin Morden! Let me not have my distresses augmented by the fall of either or both of those who are so dear to me!</p>
				<p>“At this, charmed with her sweet mediation, I thought I would have clasped her in my arms: when immediately the most angelic form I had ever beheld, all clad in transparent white, descended in a cloud, which, opening, discovered a firmament above it, crowded with golden cherubs and glittering seraphs, all addressing her with Welcome, welcome, welcome! and, encircling my charmer, ascended with her to the region of seraphims; and instantly, the opened cloud closing, I lost sight of <em>her</em>, and of the <em>bright form</em> together, and found wrapt in my arms her azure robe (all stuck thick with stars of embossed silver) which I had caught hold of in hopes of detaining her; but was all that was left me of my beloved Clarissa. And then, (horrid to relate!) the floor sinking under <em>me</em>, as the firmament had opened for <em>her</em>, I dropped into a hole more frightful than that of Elden; and, tumbling over and over down it, without view of a bottom, I awaked in a panic; and was as effectually disordered for half an hour, as if my dream had been a reality.”</p>
				<p>Wilt thou forgive my troubling thee with such visionary stuff? Thou wilt see by it only that, sleeping or waking, my Clarissa is always present with me.</p>
				<p>But here this moment is Will come running hither to tell me that his lady actually returned to her lodgings last night between eleven and twelve; and is now there, though very ill.</p>
				<p>I hasten to her. But, that I may not add to her indisposition, by any rough or boisterous behaviour, I will be as soft and gentle as the dove herself in my addresses to her.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>That I do love her, I all ye host of Heaven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be witness.⁠—That she is dear to me!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dearer than day, to one whom sight must leave;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dearer than life, to one who fears to die!</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The chair is come. I fly to my beloved.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
