<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 415: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-415" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">415</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p class="explanatory">[In answer to his of <time datetime="08-17"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 17</time>. See <a href="letter-413.xhtml">Letter 413</a>]</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Sunday, <time datetime="08-20"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 20</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>What an unmerciful fellow art thou! A man has no need of a conscience, who has such an impertinent monitor. But if <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Nic.</abbr> Rowe wrote a play that answers not his title, am I to be reflected upon for that?⁠—I have sinned; I repent; I would repair⁠—she forgives my sin: she accepts my repentance: but she won’t let me repair⁠—What wouldst thou have me do?</p>
				<p>But get thee gone to Belton, as soon as thou canst. Yet whether thou goest or not, up I <em>must</em> go, and see what I can do with the sweet oddity myself. The moment these <em>prescribing</em> varlets will let me, depend upon it, I go. Nay, Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> thinks she ought to permit me one interview. His opinion has great authority with me⁠—when it squares with my own: and I have assured him, and my two cousins, that I will behave with all the decency and respect that man can behave with to the person whom he <em>most</em> respects. And so I will. Of this, if thou choosest not to go to Belton meantime, thou shalt be witness.</p>
				<p>Colonel Morden, thou hast heard me say, is a man of honour and bravery:⁠—but Colonel Morden has had his girls, as well as you or I. And indeed, either openly or secretly, who has not? The devil always baits with a pretty wench, when he angles for a man, be his age, rank, or degree, what it will.</p>
				<p>I have often heard my beloved speak of the Colonel with great distinction and esteem. I wish he could make matters a little easier, for her mind’s sake, between the rest of the implacables and herself.</p>
				<p>Methinks I am sorry for honest Belton. But a man cannot be ill, or vapourish, but thou liftest up thy shriek-owl note, and killest him immediately. None but a fellow, who is for a drummer in death’s forlorn-hope, could take so much delight, as thou dost, in beating a dead-march with thy goose-quills. Whereas, didst thou but know thine own talents, thou art formed to give mirth by thy very appearance; and wouldst make a better figure by half, leading up thy brother-bears at Hockley in the Hole, to the music of a Scot’s bagpipe. Methinks I see thy clumsy sides shaking, (and shaking the sides of all beholders), in these attitudes; thy fat head archly beating time on thy porterly shoulders, right and left by turns, as I once beheld thee practising to the hornpipe at Preston. Thou remembrest the frolick, as I have done an hundred times; for I never before saw thee appear so much in character.</p>
				<p>But I know what I shall get by this⁠—only that notable observation repeated, That thy outside is the worst of thee, and mine the best of me. And so let it be. Nothing thou writest of <em>this sort</em> can I take amiss.</p>
				<p>But I shall call thee seriously to account, when I see thee, for the extracts thou hast given the lady from my letters, notwithstanding what I said in my last; especially if she continue to refuse me. An hundred times have I myself known a woman deny, yet comply at last: but, by these extracts, thou hast, I doubt, made her bar up the door of her heart, as she used to do her chamber-door, against me.⁠—This therefore is a disloyalty that friendship cannot bear, nor honour allow me to forgive.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
