<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 403: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to John Harlowe, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-403" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">403</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to John Harlowe, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday, <time datetime="08-10"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 10</time></p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Honoured Sir,</p>
				</header>
				<p>It was an act of charity I begged: only for a last blessing, that I might die in peace. I ask not to be received again, as my severe sister (Oh! that I had not written to her!) is pleased to say, is my view. Let that grace be denied me when I do.</p>
				<p>I could not look forward to my last scene with comfort, without seeking, at least, to obtain the blessing I petitioned for; and that with a contrition so deep, that I deserved not, were it known, to be turned over from the tender nature of a mother, to the upbraiding pen of an uncle! and to be wounded by a cruel question, put by him in a shocking manner: and which a little, a very little time, will better answer than I can: for I am not either a hardened or shameless creature: if I were, I should not have been so solicitous to obtain the favour I sued for.</p>
				<p>And permit me to say that I asked it as well for my father and mother’s sake, as for my own; for I am sure <em>they</em> at least will be uneasy, after I am gone, that they refused it to me.</p>
				<p>I should still be glad to have theirs, and yours, Sir, and all your blessings, and your prayers: but, denied in such a manner, I will not presume again to ask it: relying entirely on the Almighty’s; which is never denied, when supplicated for with such true penitence as I hope mine is.</p>
				<p>God preserve my dear uncle, and all my honoured friends! prays</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your unhappy</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
