<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 375: Mrs. Norton, to Mrs. Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-375" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">375</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton, to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harlowe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday, <time datetime="07-28">July 28</time></p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Honoured Madam,</p>
				</header>
				<p>Being forbid (without leave) to send you anything I might happen to receive from my beloved Miss Clary, and so ill, that I cannot attend you to <em>ask</em> your leave, I give you this trouble, to let you know that I have received a letter from her; which, I think, I should hereafter be held inexcusable, as things may happen, if I did not desire permission to communicate to you, and that as soon as possible.</p>
				<p>Applications have been made to the dear young lady from Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>, from the two ladies his sisters, and from both his nieces, and from the wicked man himself, to forgive and marry him. This, in noble indignation for the usage she has received from him, she has absolutely refused. And perhaps, Madam, if you and the honoured family should be of opinion that to comply with their wishes is <em>now</em> the properest measure that <em>can</em> be taken, the circumstances of things may require your authority or advice, to induce her to change her mind.</p>
				<p>I have reason to believe that one motive for her refusal is her full conviction that she shall not long be a trouble to anybody; and so she would not give a husband a right to interfere with her family, in relation to the estate her grandfather devised to her. But of this, however, I have not the least intimation from her. Nor would she, I dare say, mention it <em>as</em> a reason, having still stronger reasons, from his vile treatment of her, to refuse him.</p>
				<p>The letter I have received will show how truly penitent the dear creature is; and, if I have your permission, I will send it sealed up, with a copy of mine, to which it is an answer. But as I resolve upon this step without her knowledge, (and indeed I do), I will not acquaint her with it, unless it be attended with desirable effects: because, otherwise, besides making me incur her displeasure, it might quite break her already half-broken heart. I am,</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Honoured Madam,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your dutiful and ever-obliged servant,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Judith Norton.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
