<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 527: Mr. Belford, to Lord M.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-527" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">527</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Lord <abbr class="name">M.</abbr></h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Wedn. Night, <time datetime="10-04"><abbr>Oct.</abbr> 4</time></p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">My Lord,</p>
				</header>
				<p>I am just returned from attending <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace as far as Gad’s-Hill, near Rochester. He was exceeding gay all the way. Mowbray and Tourville are gone on with him. They will see him embark, and under sail; and promise to follow him in a month or two; for they say, there is no living without him, now he is once more himself.</p>
				<p>He and I parted with great and even solemn tokens of affection; but yet not without gay intermixtures, as I will acquaint your Lordship.</p>
				<p>Taking me aside, and clasping his arms about me, “Adieu, dear Belford!” said he: “may you proceed in the course you have entered upon!⁠—Whatever airs I give myself, this charming creature has fast hold of me <em>here</em>⁠—(clapping his hand upon his heart): and I must either appear what you see me, or be what I so lately was⁠—O the divine creature!” lifting up his eyes⁠—</p>
				<p>“But if I live to come to England, and you remain fixed in your present way, and can give me encouragement, I hope rather to follow your <em>example</em>, than to ridicule you for it. This will (for I had given him a copy of it) I will make the companion of my solitary hours. You have told me a part of its melancholy contents; and that, and her posthumous letter, shall be my study; and they will prepare me for being your disciple, if you hold on.</p>
				<p>“<em>You</em>, Jack, may marry,” continued he; “and I have a wife in my eye for you.⁠—Only thou’rt such an awkward mortal:” (he saw me affected, and thought to make me smile): “but we don’t make ourselves, except it be worse by our dress. Thou art in mourning now, as well as I: but if ever thy ridiculous turn lead thee again to be beau-brocade, I will <em>bedizen</em> thee, as the girls say, on my return, to my own fancy, and according to thy own <em>natural appearance</em>⁠—Thou shalt doctor my soul, and I will doctor thy body: thou shalt see what a clever fellow I will make of thee.</p>
				<p>“As for me, I never <em>will</em>, I never <em>can</em>, marry⁠—that I will not take a few liberties, and that I will not try to start some of my former game, I won’t promise⁠—habits are not so easily shaken off⁠—but they shall be by way of wearing. So <em>return</em> and <em>reform</em> shall go together.</p>
				<p>“And now, thou sorrowful monkey, what aileth thee?” I do love him, my Lord.</p>
				<p>“Adieu!⁠—And once more adieu!”⁠—embracing me. “And when thou thinkest thou hast made thyself an interest <em>out yonder</em> (looking up) then put in a word for thy Lovelace.”</p>
				<p>Joining company, he recommended to me to write often; and promised to let me hear quickly from him; and that he would write to your Lordship, and to all his family round; for he said, that you had all been more kind to him than he had deserved.</p>
				<p>And so we parted.</p>
				<p>I hope, my Lord, for all your noble family’s sake, that we shall see him soon return, and reform, as he promises.</p>
				<p>I return your Lordship my humble thanks for the honour of your invitation to <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> Hall. The first letter I receive from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace shall give me the opportunity of embracing it. I am, my Lord,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your most faithful and obedient servant,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Belford.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
