<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 126: Miss Clarissa Harlowe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-126" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">126</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p class="explanatory">[In continuation]</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Monday Morning, <time datetime="04-17">April 17</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>Late as I went to bed, I have had very little rest. Sleep and I have quarreled; and although I court it, it will not be friends. I hope its fellow-irreconcilables at Harlowe-place enjoy its balmy comforts. Else that will be an aggravation of my fault. My brother and sister, I dare say, want it not.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, who is an early riser, as well as I, joined me in the garden about six; and after the usual salutations, asked me to resume our last night’s subject. It was upon lodgings at London, he said.</p>
				<p>I think you mentioned one to me, Sir⁠—Did you not?</p>
				<p>Yes, Madam, (but, watching the turn of my countenance), rather as what you would be welcome to, than perhaps approve of.</p>
				<p>I believe so too. To go to town upon an uncertainty, I own, is not agreeable: but to be obliged to any persons of your acquaintance, when I want to be thought independent of you; and to a person, especially, to whom my friends are to direct to me, if they vouchsafe to take notice of me at all, is an absurd thing to mention.</p>
				<p>He did not mention it as what he imagined I would accept, but only to confirm to me what he had said, that he himself knew of none fit for me.</p>
				<p>Has not your family, Madam, some one tradesman they deal with, who has conveniences of this kind? I would make it worth such a person’s while to keep his secret of your being at his house. Traders are dealers in pins, said he, and will be more obliged by a penny customer, than by a pound present, because it is in their way: yet will refuse neither, any more than a lawyer or a man of office his fee.</p>
				<p>My father’s tradesmen, I said, would, no doubt, be the first employed to find me out. So that <em>that</em> proposal was as wrong as the other. And who is it that a creature so lately in favour with all her friends can apply to, in such a situation as mine, but must be (at least) equally the friends of her relations.</p>
				<p>We had a good deal of discourse upon the same topic. But, at last, the result was this⁠—He wrote a letter to one <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Doleman, a married man, of fortune and character, (I excepting to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford), desiring him to provide decent apartments ready furnished (<em>I had told him what they should be</em>) for a single woman; consisting of a bedchamber; another for a maidservant; with the use of a dining-room or parlour. This letter he gave me to peruse; and then sealed it up, and dispatched it away in my presence, by one of his own servants, who, having business in town, is to bring back an answer.</p>
				<p>I attend the issue of it; holding myself in readiness to set out for London, unless you, my dear, advise the contrary.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
