<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 101: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-101" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">101</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday Afternoon, <time datetime="04-13">April 13</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>I am infinitely concerned, my ever dear and ever kind friend, that I am the sad occasion of the displeasure between your mother and you.⁠—How many persons have I made unhappy.</p>
				<p>Had I not to console myself, that my error is not owing to wicked precipitation, I should be the most miserable of all creatures. As it is, I am enough punished in the <em>loss of my character</em>, more valuable to me than my life; and in the <em>cruel doubts and perplexities</em> which, conflicting with my hopes, and each getting the victory by turns, harrow up my soul between them.</p>
				<p>I think, however, that you should obey your mother, and decline a correspondence with me; at least for the present. Take care how you fall into my error; for that <em>begun with carrying on a prohibited correspondence</em>; a correspondence which I thought it in my power to discontinue at pleasure. My talent is scribbling; and I the readier fell into this freedom, as I found delight in writing; having motives too, which I thought laudable; and, at one time, the permission of all my friends; to write to him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a></p>
				<p>Yet, as to this correspondence, What hurt could arise from it, if your mother could be prevailed upon to permit it to be continued?⁠—So much prudence and discretion as you have; and you, in writing to me, lying under no temptation of following so bad an example as I have set⁠—my letters too occasionally filled with self-accusation.</p>
				<p>I thank you, my dear, most cordially I thank you, for your kind offers. You may be assured, that I will sooner be beholden to you, than to anybody living. To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace the last. Do not therefore think, that by declining your favours, I have an intention to lay myself under obligations to him.</p>
				<p>I am willing to hope (notwithstanding what you write) that my friends will send me my little money, together with my clothes. They are too considerate, some of them at least, to permit that I should be put to such <em>low</em> difficulties. Perhaps, they will not be in haste to oblige me. But, if not, I cannot yet want. I believe you think, I must not dispute with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace the expenses of the road and lodgings, till I can get a fixed abode. But I hope soon to put an end even to those small sort of obligations.</p>
				<p>Small hopes indeed of a reconciliation from your account of my uncle’s visit to your mother, in order to set her against an almost friendless creature whom once he loved! <em>But is it not my duty to try for it?</em> Ought I to widen my error by obstinacy and resentment, because of their resentment; which must appear reasonable to them, as they suppose my flight premeditated; and as they are made to believe, that I am capable of triumphing <em>in it</em>, and <em>over them</em>, with the <em>man they hate</em>? When I have done all in my power to restore myself to their favour, I shall have the less to reproach myself with.</p>
				<p>These considerations make me waver about following your advice, in relation to marriage; and the rather, as he is so full of complaisance with regard to my former conditions, which he calls my <em>injunctions</em>. Nor can I now, that my friends, as you inform me, have so strenuously declared <q>against accepting of the mediation of the ladies of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s family</q>, put myself into their protection, unless I am resolved to give up all hopes of a reconciliation with my own.</p>
				<p>Yet if any happy introduction <em>could</em> be thought of to effect this desirable purpose, how shall terms be proposed to my father, while this man is with me, or near me? On the other hand, should they in his absence get me back by force, (and this, you are of opinion, they would attempt to do, but in fear of him), how will their severest acts of compulsion be justified by my flight from them!⁠—Meanwhile, to what censures, as you remind me, do I expose myself, while he and I are together and unmarried!⁠—Yet (can I with patience ask the question?) <q>Is it in my power?</q>⁠—O my dear Miss Howe! And am I so reduced, as that, to save the poor remains of my reputation in the world’s eye, I must <em>watch the gracious motion</em> from this man’s lips?</p>
				<p>Were my cousin Morden in England, all might still perhaps be determined happily.</p>
				<p>If no other mediation than this can be procured to set on foot the wished-for reconciliation, and if my situation with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace alter not in the interim, I must endeavour to keep myself in a state of independence till he arrive, that I may be at liberty to govern myself by his advice and direction.</p>
				<p>I will acquaint you, as you desire, with all that passes between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace and me. Hitherto I have not discovered anything in his behaviour that is very exceptionable. Yet I cannot say, that I think the respect he shows me, an easy, unrestrained, and natural respect, although I can hardly tell where the fault is.</p>
				<p>But he has doubtless an arrogant and encroaching spirit. Nor is he so polite as his education, and other advantages, might have made one expect him to be. He seems, in short, to be one, who has always had too much of his own will to study to accommodate himself to that of others.</p>
				<p>As to the placing of some confidence in him, I shall be as ready to take your advice in this particular, as in all others, and as he will be to deserve it. But <em>tricked away</em> as I was by him, not only <em>against my judgment, but my inclination</em>, can he, or anybody, expect, that I should immediately treat him with complaisance, as if I acknowledged obligation to him for carrying me away?⁠—If I did, must he not either think me a vile dissembler <em>before</em> he gained that point, or <em>afterwards</em>?</p>
				<p>Indeed, indeed, my dear, I could tear my hair, on reconsidering what you write (as to the probability that the dreaded Wednesday was more dreaded than it needed to be) to think, that I should be thus tricked by this man; and that, in all likelihood, through his vile agent Joseph Leman. So premeditated and elaborate a wickedness as it must be!⁠—Must I not, <em>with such a man</em>, be wanting <em>to myself</em>, if I were <em>not</em> jealous and vigilant?⁠—Yet what a life to live for a spirit <em>so open</em>, and naturally <em>so unsuspicious</em>, as mine?</p>
				<p>I am obliged to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickman for the assistance he is so kindly ready to give to our correspondence. He is so <em>little likely</em> to make to himself an additional merit with the <em>daughter</em> upon it, that I shall be very sorry, if he risk anything with the <em>mother</em> by it.</p>
				<p>I am now in a state of obligation: so must rest satisfied with whatever I cannot help. Whom have I the power, once so precious to me, of obliging?⁠—What I mean, my dear, is, that I ought, perhaps, to expect, that my influences over you are weakened by my indiscretion. Nevertheless, I will not, if I can help it, <em>desert myself</em>, nor give up the privilege you used to allow me, of telling you what I think of such parts of your conduct as I may not approve.</p>
				<p>You must permit me therefore, severe as your mother is against an undesigning offender, to say that I think your liveliness to her inexcusable⁠—to pass over, for this time, what nevertheless concerns me not a little, the free treatment you almost <em>indiscriminately</em> give to my relations.</p>
				<p>If you will not, for your <em>duty’s sake</em>, forbear your tauntings and impatience, let me beseech you, that you will for <em>mine</em>.⁠—Since otherwise, your mother may apprehend that my example, like a leaven, is working itself into the mind of her beloved daughter. And may not such an apprehension give her an irreconcilable displeasure against me?</p>
				<p>I enclose the copy of my letter to my sister, which you are desirous to see. You will observe, that although I have not demanded my estate in form, and of my trustees, yet that I have hinted at leave to retire to it. How joyfully would I keep my word, if they would accept of the offer I renew!⁠—It was not proper, I believe you will think, on many accounts, to own that I was carried off against my inclination. I am, my dearest friend,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your ever obliged and affectionate,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr class="name">Cl.</abbr> Harlowe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
