<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 364: Mr. Belford, to Robert Lovelace, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-364" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">364</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Robert Lovelace, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p class="explanatory">[In answer to Letters <a href="letter-347.xhtml">347</a>, <a href="letter-350.xhtml">350</a>]</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Edgware, Monday, <time datetime="07-24">July 24</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>What pains thou takest to persuade thyself, that the lady’s ill health is owing to the vile arrest, and to the implacableness of her friends. Both primarily (if they were) to be laid at thy door. What poor excuses will good hearts make for the evils they are put upon by bad hearts!⁠—But ’tis no wonder that he who can sit down premeditatedly to do a bad action, will content himself with a bad excuse: and yet what fools must he suppose the rest of the world to be, if he imagines them as easy to be imposed upon as he can impose upon himself?</p>
				<p>In vain dost thou impute to pride or wilfulness the necessity to which thou hast reduced this lady of parting with her clothes; For can she do otherwise, and be the noble-minded creature she is?</p>
				<p>Her implacable friends have refused her the current cash she left behind her; and wished, as her sister wrote to her, to see her reduced to want: probably therefore they will not be sorry that she is reduced to such straights; and will take it for a justification from Heaven of their wicked hard heartedness. Thou canst not suppose she would take supplies from thee: to take them from me would, in her opinion, be taking them from thee. Miss Howe’s mother is an avaricious woman; and, perhaps, the daughter can do nothing of that sort unknown to her; and, if she <em>could</em>, is too noble a girl to deny it, if charged. And then Miss Harlowe is firmly of opinion, that she shall never want nor wear the thing she disposes of.</p>
				<p>Having heard nothing from town that obliges me to go thither, I shall gratify poor Belton with my company till tomorrow, or perhaps till Wednesday. For the unhappy man is more and more loth to part with me. I shall soon set out for Epsom, to endeavour to serve him there, and reinstate him in his own house. Poor fellow! he is most horribly low spirited; mopes about; and nothing diverts him. I pity him at my heart; but can do him no good.⁠—What consolation can I give him, either from his past life, or from his future prospects?</p>
				<p>Our friendships and intimacies, Lovelace, are only calculated for strong life and health. When sickness comes, we look round us, and upon one another, like frighted birds, at the sight of a kite ready to souse upon them. Then, with all our bravery, what miserable wretches are we!</p>
				<p>Thou tellest me that thou seest reformation is coming swiftly upon me. I hope it is. I see so much difference in the behaviour of this admirable woman in <em>her</em> illness, and that of poor Belton in <em>his</em>, that it is plain to me the sinner is the real coward, and the saint the true hero; and, sooner or later, we shall all find it to be so, if we are not cut off suddenly.</p>
				<p>The lady shut herself up at six o’clock yesterday afternoon; and intends not to see company till seven or eight this; not even her nurse⁠—imposing upon herself a severe fast. And why? <em>It is her</em> <strong>birthday</strong>!⁠—Blooming⁠—yet declining in her very blossom!⁠—Every birthday till this, no doubt, happy!⁠—What must be her reflections!⁠—What ought to be thine!</p>
				<p>What sport dost thou make with my aspirations, and my prostrations, as thou callest them; and with my dropping of the banknote behind her chair! I had too much awe of her at the time, to make it with the grace that would better have become my intention. But the action, if awkward, was modest. Indeed, the fitter subject for ridicule with thee; who canst no more taste the beauty and delicacy of modest obligingness than of modest love. For the same may be said of inviolable respect, that the poet says of unfeigned affection,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span class="i1">I <em>speak</em>! I know not what!⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Speak ever so: and if I <em>answer</em> you</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I know not what, it shows the more of love.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love is a child that talks in broken language;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet then it speaks most plain.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The like may be pleaded in behalf of that modest respect which made the humble offerer afraid to invade the awful eye, or the revered hand; but awkwardly to drop its incense behind the altar it should have been laid upon. But how should that soul, which could treat delicacy itself brutally, know anything of this!</p>
				<p>But I am still more amazed at thy courage, to think of throwing thyself in the way of Miss Howe, and Miss Arabella Harlowe!⁠—Thou wilt not dare, surely, to carry this thought into execution!</p>
				<p>As to <em>my</em> dress, and <em>thy</em> dress, I have only to say, that the sum total of thy observation is this: that <em>my</em> outside is the worst of me; and <em>thine</em> the <em>best</em> of thee: and what gettest thou by the comparison? Do thou reform the one, I’ll try to mend the other. I challenge thee to begin.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lovick gave me, at my request, the copy of a meditation she showed me, which was extracted by the lady from the scriptures, while under arrest at Rowland’s, as appears by the date. The lady is not to know that I have taken a copy.</p>
				<p>You and I always admired the noble simplicity, and natural ease and dignity of style, which are the distinguishing characteristics of these books, whenever any passages from them, by way of quotation in the works of other authors, popped upon us. And once I remember you, even <em>you</em>, observed, that those passages always appeared to you like a rich vein of golden ore, which runs through baser metals; embellishing the work they were brought to authenticate.</p>
				<p>Try, Lovelace, if thou canst relish a Divine beauty. I think it must strike transient (if not permanent) remorse into thy heart. Thou boastest of thy ingenuousness: let this be the test of it; and whether thou canst be serious on a subject too deep, the occasion of it resulting from thyself.</p>
				<blockquote class="meditation">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b>Meditation</b>
						</p>
						<p><time datetime="07-15">Saturday, July 15</time>.</p>
					</header>
					<p>O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the balance together!</p>
					<p>For now it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefore my words are swallowed up!</p>
					<p>For the arrows of the Almighty are within me; the poison whereof drinketh up my spirit. The terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.</p>
					<p>When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise? When will the night be gone? And I am full of tossings to and fro, unto the dawning of the day.</p>
					<p>My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle, and are spent without hope⁠—mine eye shall no more see good.</p>
					<p>Wherefore is light given to her that is in misery; and life unto the bitter in soul?</p>
					<p>Who longeth for death; but it cometh not; and diggeth for it more than for hid treasures?</p>
					<p>Why is light given to one whose way is hid; and whom God hath hedged in?</p>
					<p>For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me!</p>
					<p>I was not in safety; neither had I rest; neither was I quiet; yet trouble came.</p>
					<p>But behold God is mighty, and despiseth not any.</p>
					<p>He giveth right to the poor⁠—and if they be found in fetters, and holden in cords of affliction, then he showeth them their works and their transgressions.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>I have a little leisure, and am in a scribbing vein: indulge me, Lovelace, a few reflections on these sacred books.</p>
				<p>We are taught to read the Bible, when children, as a rudiment only; and, as far as I know, this may be the reason why we think ourselves above it when at a maturer age. For you know that our parents, as well as we, <em>wisely</em> rate our proficiency by the books we are advanced to, and not by our understanding of those we have passed through. But, in my uncle’s illness, I had the curiosity, in some of my dull hours, (lighting upon one in his closet), to dip into it: and then I found, wherever I turned, that there were <em>admirable things in it</em>. I have borrowed one, on receiving from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lovick the above meditation; for I had a mind to compare the passages contained in it by the book, hardly believing they could be so exceedingly apposite as I find they are. And one time or another, it is very likely, that I shall make a resolution to give the whole Bible a perusal, by way of <em>course</em>, as I may say.</p>
				<p>This, meantime, I will venture to repeat, is certain, that the style is that truly easy, simple, and natural one, which we should admire in each other authors excessively. Then all the world join in an opinion of the antiquity, and authenticity too, of the book; and the learned are fond of strengthening their different arguments by its sanctions. Indeed, I was so much taken with it at my uncle’s, that I was half ashamed that it appeared so <em>new</em> to me. And yet, I cannot but say, that I have some of the Old Testament history, as it is called, in my head: but, perhaps, am more obliged for it to Josephus than to the Bible itself.</p>
				<p>Odd enough, with all our pride of learning, that we choose to derive the little we know from the under currents, perhaps muddy ones too, when the clear, the pellucid fountainhead, is much nearer at hand, and easier to be come at⁠—slighted the more, possibly, for that very reason!</p>
				<p>But man is a pragmatical, foolish creature; and the more we look into him, the more we must despise him⁠—Lords of the creation!⁠—Who can forbear indignant laughter! When we see not one of the individuals of that creation (his perpetually-eccentric self excepted) but acts within its own natural and original appointment: is of fancied and self-dependent excellence, he is obliged not only for the ornaments, but for the necessaries of life, (that is to say, for food as well as raiment), to all the other creatures; strutting with their blood and spirits in his veins, and with their plumage on his back: for what has he of his own, but a very mischievous, monkey-like, bad nature! Yet thinks himself at liberty to kick, and cuff, and elbow out every worthier creature: and when he has none of the animal creation to hunt down and abuse, will make use of his power, his strength, or his wealth, to oppress the less powerful and weaker of his own species!</p>
				<p>When you and I meet next, let us enter more largely into this subject: and, I dare say, we shall take it by turns, in imitation of the two sages of antiquity, to laugh and to weep at the thoughts of what miserable, yet conceited beings, men in general, but we libertines in particular, are.</p>
				<p>I fell upon a piece at Dorrell’s, this very evening, intituled, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Sacred Classics</i>, written by one Blackwell.</p>
				<p>I took it home with me, and had not read a dozen pages, when I was convinced that I ought to be ashamed of myself to think how greatly I have admired less noble and less natural beauties in Pagan authors; while I have known nothing of this all-exciting collection of beauties, the Bible! By my faith, Lovelace, I shall for the future have a better opinion of the good sense and taste of half a score of parsons, whom I have fallen in with in my time, and despised for <em>magnifying</em>, as I thought they did, the language and the sentiments to be found in it, in preference to all the ancient poets and philosophers. And this is now a convincing proof to me, and shames as much an infidel’s presumption as his ignorance, that those who know least are the greatest scoffers. A pretty pack of would-be wits of us, who censure without knowledge, laugh without reason, and are most noisy and loud against things we know least of!</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
