<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 482: Mr. Belford, to Robert Lovelace, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-482" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">482</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Robert Lovelace, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Nine, Friday Morn</p>
				</header>
				<p>I have no opportunity to write at length, having necessary orders to give on the melancholy occasion. Joel, who got to me by six in the morning, and whom I dispatched instantly back with the letter I had ready from last night, gives me but an indifferent account of the state of your mind. I wonder not at it; but time (and nothing else can) will make it easier to you: if (that is to say) you have compounded with your conscience; else it may be heavier every day than other.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Tourville tells us what a way you are in. I hope you will not think of coming hither. The lady in her will desires you may not see her. Four copies are making of it. It is a long one; for she gives her reasons for all she wills. I will write to you more particularly as soon as possibly I can.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Three letters are just brought by a servant in livery, directed <em>To Miss Clarissa Harlowe</em>. I will send copies of them to you. The contents are enough to make one mad. How would this poor lady have rejoiced to receive them!⁠—And yet, if she had, she would not have been enabled to say, as she nobly did,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-382" id="noteref-382" epub:type="noteref">382</a> <q>That God would not let her depend for comfort upon any but Himself.</q>⁠—And indeed for some days past she had seemed to have got above all worldly considerations.⁠—Her <em>fervent love, even for her Miss Howe</em>, as she acknowledged, having given way to <q>supremer fervours</q>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-383" id="noteref-383" epub:type="noteref">383</a></p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
