<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 38: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-38" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">38</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Monday, <time datetime="03-20">March 20</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>Your last so sensibly affects me, that I must postpone every other consideration, however weighty, to reply to it: and this I will do very distinctly, and with all the openness of heart which our mutual friendship demands.</p>
				<p>But let me observe, in the first place, <em>gratefully</em> observe, that if I have in <em>fifty passages</em> of my letters given you such <em>undoubted</em> proofs of my value for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, that you have spared me for the sake of my <em>explicitness</em>, it is acting by me with a generosity worthy of yourself.</p>
				<p>But lives the man, think you, who is so very bad, that he does not give even a doubting mind reason at one time to be better pleased with him than at <em>another</em>? And when that reason offers, is it not just to express one’s self accordingly? I would do the man who addresses me as much <em>justice</em>, as if he did <em>not</em> address me: it has such a look of tyranny, it appears so ungenerous, methinks, in our sex, to use a man worse for his respect to us, (no other cause for disrespect occurring), that I would not by any means be that person who should do so.</p>
				<p>But, although I may intend no more than justice, it will perhaps be difficult to hinder those who know the man’s views, from construing it as a partial favour: and especially if the eager-eyed observer has been formerly touched herself, and would triumph that her friend had been no more able to escape than she. Noble minds, emulative of perfection, (and yet the passion properly directed, I do not take to be an <em>imperfection</em> neither), may be allowed a little generous envy, I think.</p>
				<p>If I meant by this a reflection, by way of revenge, it is but a revenge, my dear, in the <em>soft</em> sense of the word. I love, as I have told you, your pleasantry. Although at the time your reproof may pain me a little; yet, on recollection, when I find it more of the cautioning friend than of the satirizing observer, I shall be all gratitude upon it. All the business will be this; I shall be sensible of the pain in the present letter perhaps; but I shall thank you in the next, and ever after.</p>
				<p>In this way, I hope, my dear, you will account for a little of that sensibility which you find above, and perhaps still more, as I proceed.⁠—You frequently remind me, by an excellent <em>example</em>, your own to <em>me</em>, that I must not spare <em>you</em>!</p>
				<p>I am not conscious, that I have written anything of this man, that has not been more in his dispraise than in his favour. Such <em>is</em> the man, that I think I must have been faulty, and ought to take myself to account, if I had not. But you think otherwise, I will not put you upon <q>labouring the proof</q>, as you call it. My conduct must then have a faulty <em>appearance</em> at least, and I will endeavour to rectify it. But of this I assure you, that whatever interpretation my words were capable of, I <em>intended not</em> any reserve to you. I wrote my heart at the time: if I had had thought of disguising it, or been conscious that there was <em>reason</em> for doing so, perhaps I had not given you the opportunity of remarking upon my <em>curiosity</em> after his relations’ esteem for me; nor upon my <q>conditional liking</q>, and suchlike. All I intended by the first, I believe, I honestly told you at the time. To that letter I therefore refer, whether it make for me, or against me: and by the other, that I might bear in mind, what it became a person of my sex and character to <em>be</em> and to <em>do</em>, in such an unhappy situation, where the imputed love is thought an undutiful, and therefore a criminal passion; and where the supported object of it is a man of faulty morals too. And I am sure you will excuse my desire of appearing at those times the person I ought to be; had I no other view in it but to merit the continuance of your good opinion.</p>
				<p>But that I may acquit myself of having reserves⁠—O, my dear, I must here break off⁠—!</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
