<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 76: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-76" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">76</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>I am glad my papers are safe in your hands. I will make it my endeavour to deserve your good opinion, that I may not at once disgrace your judgment, and my own heart.</p>
				<p>I have another letter from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. He is extremely apprehensive of the meeting I am to have with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes tomorrow. He says, “that the airs that wretch gives himself on the occasion add to his concern; and it is with infinite difficulty that he prevails upon himself not to make him a visit to let him know what he may expect, if compulsion be used towards me in his favour. He assures me, that Solmes has actually talked with tradesmen of new equipages, and names the people in town with whom he has treated: that he has even” (Was there ever such a horrid wretch!) “allotted this and that apartment in his house, for a nursery, and other offices.”</p>
				<p>How shall I bear to hear such a creature talk of love to me? I shall be out of all patience with him. Besides, I thought that he did not dare to make or talk of these impudent preparations.⁠—So inconsistent as such are with my brother’s views⁠—but I fly the subject.</p>
				<p>Upon this confidence of Solmes, you will less wonder at that of Lovelace, “in pressing me in the name of all his family, to escape from so determined a violence as is intended to be offered to me at my uncle’s: that the forward contriver should propose Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>’s chariot and six to be at the stile that leads up to the lonely coppice adjoining to our paddock. You will see how audaciously he mentions settlements ready drawn; horsemen ready to mount; and one of his cousins Montague to be in the chariot, or at the George in the neighbouring village, waiting to accompany me to Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>’s, or to Lady Betty’s or Lady Sarah’s, or to town, as I please; and upon such orders, or conditions, and under such restrictions, as to himself, as I shall prescribe.”</p>
				<p>You will see how he threatens, “To watch and waylay them, and to <em>rescue</em> me as he calls it, by an armed force of friends and servants, if they attempt to carry me against my will to my uncle’s; and this, whether I give my consent to the enterprise, or not:⁠—since he shall have no hopes if I am once there.”</p>
				<p>O my dear friend! Who can think of these things, and not be extremely miserable in her apprehensions!</p>
				<p>This mischievous sex! What had I to do with any of them; or they with me?⁠—I had deserved this, were it by my own seeking, by my own giddiness, that I had brought myself into this situation⁠—I wish with all my heart⁠—but how foolish we are apt to wish when we find ourselves unhappy, and know not how to help ourselves!</p>
				<p>On your mother’s goodness, however, is my reliance. If I can but avoid being precipitated on either hand, till my cousin Morden arrives, a reconciliation must follow; and all will be happy.</p>
				<p>I have deposited a letter for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace; in which “I charge him, as he would not disoblige me forever, to avoid any rash step, any visit to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes, which may be followed by acts of violence.”</p>
				<p>I reassure him, “That I will sooner die than be that man’s wife.</p>
				<p>“Whatever be my usage, whatever shall be the result of the apprehended interview, I insist upon it that he presume not to offer violence to any of my friends: and express myself highly displeased, that he should presume upon such an interest in my esteem, as to think himself entitled to dispute my father’s authority in my removal to my uncle’s; although I tell him, that I will omit neither prayers nor contrivance, even to the making myself ill, to avoid going.”</p>
				<p>Tomorrow is Tuesday! How soon comes upon us the day we dread!⁠—Oh that a deep sleep of twenty four hours would seize my faculties!⁠—But then the next day would be Tuesday, as to all the effects and purposes for which I so much dread it. If this reach you before the event of the so much apprehended interview can be known, pray for</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
