<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 391: Mr. Belford, to Robert Lovelace, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-391" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">391</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Robert Lovelace, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Friday Night, <time datetime="08-04"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 4</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>I have actually delivered to the lady the extracts she requested me to give her from your letters. I do assure you that I have made the very best of the matter for you, <em>not</em> that conscience, but that friendship, could oblige me to make. I have changed or omitted some free words. The warm description of her person in the <em>fire-scene</em>, as I may call it, I have omitted. I have told her, that I have done justice to you, in the justice you have done to her by her unexampled virtue. But take the very words which I wrote to her immediately following the extracts:</p>
				<p>“And now, Madam,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-322" id="noteref-322" epub:type="noteref">322</a>⁠—</p>
				<p>The lady is extremely uneasy at the thoughts of your attempting to visit her. For Heaven’s sake, (your word being given), and for pity’s sake, (for she is really in a very weak and languishing way), let me beg of you not to think of it.</p>
				<p>Yesterday afternoon she received a cruel letter (as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lovick supposes it to be, by the effect it had upon her) from her sister, in answer to one written last Saturday, entreating a blessing and forgiveness from her parents.</p>
				<p>She acknowledges, that if the same decency and justice are observed in all of your letters, as in the extracts I have obliged her with, (as I have assured her they are), she shall think herself freed from the necessity of writing her own story: and this is an advantage to thee which thou oughtest to thank me for.</p>
				<p>But what thinkest thou is the second request she had to make to me? no other than that I would be her <em>executor</em>!⁠—Her motives will appear before thee in proper time; and then, I dare to answer, will be satisfactory.</p>
				<p>You cannot imagine how proud I am of this trust. I am afraid I shall too soon come into the execution of it. As she is always writing, what a melancholy pleasure will be the perusal and disposition of her papers afford me! such a sweetness of temper, so much patience and resignation, as she seems to be mistress of; yet writing of and in the midst of <em>present</em> distresses! how <em>much more</em> lively and affecting, for that reason, must her style be; her mind tortured by the pangs of uncertainty, (the events then hidden in the womb of fate), <em>than</em> the dry, narrative, unanimated style of persons, relating difficulties and dangers surmounted; the relater perfectly at ease; and if himself unmoved by his own story, not likely greatly to affect the reader!</p>
				<hr/>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Saturday Morning, <time datetime="08-05"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 5</time>.</p>
				<p>I am just returned from visiting the lady, and thanking her in person for the honour she has done me; and assuring her, if called to the sacred trust, of the utmost fidelity and exactness.</p>
				<p>I found her very ill. I took notice of it. She said, she had received a second hardhearted letter from her sister; and she had been writing a letter (and that on her knees) directly to her mother; which, <em>before</em>, she had not had the courage to do. It was for a last blessing and forgiveness. No wonder, she said, that I saw her affected. Now that I had accepted of the last charitable office for her, (for which, as well as for complying with her other request, she thanked me), I should one day have all these letters before me: and could she have a <em>kind one</em> in return to that she had been now writing, to <em>counterbalance</em> the unkind one she had from her sister, she might be induced to show me both together⁠—otherwise, for her sister’s sake, it were no matter how few saw the poor Bella’s letter.</p>
				<p>I knew she would be displeased if I had censured the cruelty of her relations: I therefore only said, that surely she must have enemies, who hoped to find their account in keeping up the resentments of her friends against her.</p>
				<p>It may be so, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Belford, said she: the unhappy never want enemies. One fault, wilfully committed, authorizes the imputation of many more. Where the ear is opened to accusations, accusers will not be wanting; and everyone will officiously come with stories against a disgraced child, where nothing dare be said in her favour. I should have been wise in time, and not have needed to be convinced, by my own misfortunes, of the truth of what common experience daily demonstrates. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s baseness, my father’s inflexibility, my sister’s reproaches, are the natural consequences of my own rashness; so I must make the best of my hard lot. Only, as these consequences follow one another so closely, while they are <em>new</em>, how can I help being anew affected?</p>
				<p>I asked, if a letter written by myself, by her doctor or apothecary, to any of her friends, representing her low state of health, and great humility, would be acceptable? or if a journey to any of them would be of service, I would gladly undertake it in person, and strictly conform to her orders, to whomsoever she should direct me to apply.</p>
				<p>She earnestly desired that nothing of this sort might be attempted, especially without her knowledge and consent. Miss Howe, she said, had done harm by her kindly-intended zeal; and if there were room to expect favour by mediation, she had ready at hand a kind friend, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norton, who for piety and prudence had few equals; and who would let slip no opportunity to endeavour to do her service.</p>
				<p>I let her know that I was going out of town till Monday: she wished me pleasure; and said she should be glad to see me on my return.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Adieu!</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
