<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 421: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-421" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">421</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Wednesday <abbr>Morn.</abbr> <time datetime="08-23"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 23</time></p>
				</header>
				<p>All alive, dear Jack, and in ecstacy!⁠—Likely to be once more a happy man! For I have received a letter from my beloved Miss Harlowe; in consequence, I suppose, of that which I mentioned in my last to be left for her from her sister. And I am setting out for <abbr epub:type="z3998:place">Berks.</abbr> directly, to show the contents to my Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> and to receive the congratulations of all my kindred upon it.</p>
				<p>I went, last night, as I intended, to Smith’s: but the dear creature was not returned at near ten o’clock. And, lighting upon Tourville, I took him home with me, and made him sing me out of my megrims. I went to bed tolerably easy at two; had bright and pleasant dreams; (not such of a frightful one as that I gave thee an account of); and at eight this morning, as I was dressing, to be in readiness against the return of my fellow, whom I had sent to inquire after the lady, I had the following letter brought to me by a chairman:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p class="letter-header">To <span epub:type="z3998:recipient">Robert Lovelace</span>, <abbr class="eoc">Esq.</abbr></p>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday Night, 11 o’clock (<time datetime="08-22"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 22</time>).</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Sir,</p>
					</header>
					<p>I have good news to tell you. I am setting out with all diligence for my father’s house, I am bid to hope that he will receive his poor penitent with a goodness peculiar to himself; for I am overjoyed with the assurance of a thorough reconciliation, through the interposition of a dear, blessed friend, whom I always loved and honoured. I am so taken up with my preparation for this joyful and long-wished-for journey, that I cannot spare one moment for any other business, having several matters of the last importance to settle first. So, pray, Sir, don’t disturb or interrupt me⁠—I beseech you don’t. You may possibly in time see me at my father’s; at least if it be not your own fault.</p>
					<p>I will write a letter, which shall be sent you when I am got thither and received: till when, I am, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Clarissa Harlowe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>I dispatched instantly a letter to the dear creature, assuring her, with the most thankful joy, “That I would directly set out for <abbr epub:type="z3998:place">Berks.</abbr>, and wait the issue of the happy reconciliation, and the charming hopes she had filled me with. I poured out upon her a thousand blessings. I declared that it should be the study of my whole life to merit such transcendent goodness: and that there was nothing which her father or friends should require at my hands, that I would not for <em>her</em> sake comply with, in order to promote and complete so desirable a reconciliation.”</p>
				<p>I hurried it away without taking a copy of it; and I have ordered the chariot-and-six to be got ready; and hey for <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Hall! Let me but know how Belton does. I hope a letter from thee is on the road. And if the poor fellow can spare thee, make haste, I command thee, to attend this truly divine lady. Thou mayest not else see her of months perhaps; at least, not while she is Miss Harlowe. And oblige me, if possible, with one letter before she sets out, confirming to me and accounting for this generous change.</p>
				<p>But what accounting for it is necessary? The dear creature cannot receive consolation herself but she must communicate it to others. How noble! She would not see me in her adversity; but no sooner does the sun of prosperity begin to shine upon her than she forgives me.</p>
				<p>I know to whose mediation all this is owing. It is to Colonel Morden’s. She always, as she says, loved and honoured him! And he loved her above all his relations.</p>
				<p>I shall now be convinced that there is something in dreams. The opening cloud is the reconciliation in view. The bright form, lifting up my charmer through it to a firmament stuck round with golden cherubims and seraphims, indicates the charming little boys and girls, that will be the fruits of this happy reconciliation. The welcomes, thrice repeated, are those of her family, now no more to be deemed implacable. Yet are they family, too, that my soul cannot mingle with.</p>
				<p>But then what is my tumbling over and over through the floor into a frightful hole, <em>descending</em> as she <em>ascends</em>? Ho! only this! it alludes to my disrelish to matrimony: Which is a bottomless pit, a gulf, and I know not what. And I suppose, had I not awoke in such a plaguey fright, I had been soused into some river at the bottom of the hole, and then been carried (mundified or purified from my past iniquities), by the same bright form (waiting for me upon the mossy banks), to my beloved girl; and we should have gone on cherubiming of it and caroling to the end of the chapter.</p>
				<p>But what are the black sweeping mantles and robes of Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> thrown over my face? And what are those of the ladies? O Jack! I have these too: They indicate nothing in the world but that my Lord will be so good as to die, and leave me all he has. So, rest to thy good-natured soul, honest Lord <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M.</abbr></p>
				<p>Lady Sarah Sadleir and Lady Betty Lawrance, will also die, and leave me swinging legacies.</p>
				<p>Miss Charlotte and her sister⁠—what will become of the?⁠—Oh! they will be in mourning, of course, for their uncle and aunts⁠—that’s right!</p>
				<p>As to Morden’s flashing through the window, and crying, Die, Lovelace, and be d⁠⸺⁠d, if thou wilt not repair my cousin’s wrong! That is only, that he would have sent me a challenge, had I not been disposed to do the lady justice.</p>
				<p>All I dislike is this part of the dream: for, even in a dream, I would not be thought to be threatened into any measure, though I liked it ever so well.</p>
				<p>And so much for my prophetic dream.</p>
				<p>Dear charming creature! What a meeting will there be between her and her father and mother and uncles! What transports, what pleasure, will this happy, long-wished-for reconciliation give her dutiful heart! And indeed now methinks I am glad she <em>is</em> so dutiful to them; for her duty to her parents is a conviction to me that she will be <em>as</em> dutiful to her husband: since duty upon principle is an uniform thing.</p>
				<p>Why pr’ythee, now, Jack, I have not been so much to blame as thou thinkest: for had it not been for me, who have led her into so much distress, she could neither have <em>received</em> nor <em>given</em> the joy that will now overwhelm them all. So here rises great and durable good out of temporary evil.</p>
				<p>I know they loved her (the pride and glory of their family), too well to hold out long!</p>
				<p>I wish I could have seen Arabella’s letter. She has always been so much eclipsed by her sister, that I dare say she has signified this reconciliation to her with intermingled phlegm and wormwood; and her invitation must certainly runs all in the rock-water style.</p>
				<p>I shall long to see the promised letter too when she is got to her father’s, which I hope will give an account of the reception she will meet with.</p>
				<p>There is a solemnity, however, I think, in the style of her letter, which pleases and affects me at the same time. But as it is evident she loves me still, and hopes soon to see me at her father’s, she could not help being a little solemn, and half-ashamed, (dear blushing pretty rogue!) to own her love, after my usage of her.</p>
				<p>And then her subscription: <q>Till when, I am</q>, Clarissa Harlowe: as much as to say, <em>after that</em>, I shall be, if not to <q>your own fault</q>, <strong>Clarissa</strong> Lovelace!</p>
				<p>O my best love! My ever-generous and adorable creature! How much does this thy forgiving goodness exalt us both!⁠—Me, for the occasion given thee! Thee, for turning it so gloriously to thy advantage, and to the honour of both!</p>
				<p>And if, my beloved creature, you will but connive at the imperfections of your adorer, and not play the <em>wife</em> with me: if, while the charms of novelty have their force with me, I should happen to be drawn aside by the love of intrigue, and of plots that my soul delights to form and pursue; and if thou wilt not be open-eyed to the follies of my youth, (a transitory state); every excursion shall serve but the more to endear thee to me, till in time, and in a very little time too, I shall get above sense; and then, charmed by thy soul-attracting converse; and brought to despise my former courses; what I now, at distance, consider as a painful duty, will be my joyful choice, and all my delight will centre in thee!</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Mowbray is just arrived with thy letters. I therefore close my agreeable subject, to attend to one which I doubt will be very shocking.</p>
				<p>I have engaged the rough varlet to bear me company in the morning to <abbr epub:type="z3998:place">Berks.</abbr>; where I shall file off the rust he has contracted in his attendance upon the poor fellow.</p>
				<p>He tells me that, between the dying Belton and the preaching Belford, he shan’t be his own man these three days: and says that thou addest to the unhappy fellow’s weakness, instead of giving him courage to help him to bear his destiny.</p>
				<p>I am sorry he takes the unavoidable lot so heavily. But he has been long ill; and sickness enervates the mind as well as the body; as he himself very significantly observed to thee.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
