<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 444: Mr. Brand, to John Harlowe, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-444" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">444</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brand, to John Harlowe, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<p class="explanatory">[Enclosed in the Preceding]</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Worthy Sir, My Very Good Friend and Patron,</p>
				</header>
				<p>I arrived in town yesterday, after a tolerably pleasant journey (considering the hot weather and dusty roads). I put up at the Bull and Gate in Holborn, and hastened to Covent-garden. I soon found the house where the unhappy lady lodgeth. And, in the back shop, had a good deal of discourse<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-358" id="noteref-358" epub:type="noteref">358</a> with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith, (her landlady), whom I found to be so <em>highly prepossessed</em> in her <em>favour</em>, that I saw it would not answer your desires to take my informations <em>altogether</em> from her: and being obliged to attend my patron, (who to my sorrow,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<i xml:lang="la">Miserum et aliena vivere quadra,</i>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>I find wanteth much waiting upon, and is <em>another</em> sort of man than he was at college: for, Sir, inter nos, <em>honours change manners</em>. For the <em>aforesaid causes</em>, I thought it would best answer all the ends of the commission with which you honoured me, to engage, in the desired scrutiny, the wife of a <em>particular friend</em>, who liveth almost over-against the house where she lodgeth, and who is a gentlewoman of <em>character</em>, and <em>sobriety</em>, a <em>mother of children</em>, and one who <em>knoweth</em> the <em>world</em> well.</p>
				<p>To her I applied myself, therefore, and gave her a short history of the case, and desired she would very particularly inquire into the <em>conduct</em> of the unhappy young lady; her <em>present way of life</em> and <em>subsistence</em>; her <em>visitors</em>, her <em>employments</em>, and suchlike: for these, Sir, you know, are the things whereof you wished to be informed.</p>
				<p>Accordingly, Sir, I waited upon the gentlewoman aforesaid, this day; and, to <em>my</em> very great trouble, (because I know it will be to <em>yours</em>,” and likewise to all your worthy family’s), I must say, that I do find things look a little more <em>darkly</em> than I hoped the would. For, alas! Sir, the gentlewoman’s report turneth out not so <em>favourable</em> for Miss’s reputation, as <em>I</em> wished, as <em>you</em> wished, and as <em>everyone</em> of her friends wished. But so it is throughout the world, that <em>one false step</em> generally brings on <em>another</em>; and peradventure <em>a worse</em>, and <em>a still worse</em>; till the poor <em>limed soul</em> (a very fit epithet of the Divine Quarles’s!) is quite <em>entangled</em>, and (without infinite mercy) lost forever.</p>
				<p>It seemeth, Sir, she is, notwithstanding, in a very <em>ill state of health</em>. In this, <em>both</em> gentlewomen (that is to say, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith, her landlady, and my friend’s wife) agree. Yet she goeth often out in a chair, to <em>prayers</em> (as it is said). But my friend’s wife told me, that nothing is more common in London, than that the frequenting of the church at morning prayers is made the <em>pretence</em> and <em>cover</em> for <em>private assignations</em>. What a sad thing is this! that what was designed for <em>wholesome nourishment</em> to the <em>poor soul</em>, should be turned into <em>rank poison</em>! But as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Daniel de Foe (an ingenious man, though a <em>dissenter</em>) observeth (but indeed it is an old proverb; only I think he was the first that put it into verse)</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>God never had a house of pray’r</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Satan had a chapel there.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Yet to do the lady <em>justice</em>, nobody cometh home with her: nor indeed <em>can</em> they, because she goeth forward and backward in a <em>sedan</em>, or <em>chair</em>, (as they call it). But then there is a gentleman of <em>no good character</em> (an <i xml:lang="es">intimado</i> of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace) who is a <em>constant</em> visitor of her, and of the people of the house, whom he <em>regaleth</em> and <em>treateth</em>, and hath (of consequence) their <em>high good words</em>.</p>
				<p>I have thereupon taken the trouble (for I love to be <em>exact</em> in any <em>commission</em> I undertake) to inquire <em>particularly</em> about this <em>gentleman</em>, as he is called (albeit I hold no man so but by his actions: for, as Juvenal saith,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<i xml:lang="la">—Nobilitas sola est, atque unica virtus</i>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And this I did <em>before</em> I would sit down to write to you.</p>
				<p>His name is Belford. He hath a paternal estate of upwards of one thousand pounds by the year; and is now in mourning for an uncle who left him very considerably besides. He beareth a very profligate character as to <em>women</em>, (for I inquired particularly about <em>that</em>), and is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace’s more especial <i xml:lang="es">privado</i>, with whom he holdeth a <em>regular correspondence</em>; and hath been often seen with Miss (tête à tête) at the <em>window</em>⁠—in no <em>bad way</em>, indeed: but my friend’s wife is of opinion that all is not <em>as it should be</em>. And, indeed, it is mighty strange to me, if Miss be so <em>notable a penitent</em> (as is represented) and if she have such an <em>aversion</em> to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, that she will admit his <i xml:lang="es">privado</i> into <em>her retirements</em>, and see <em>no other company</em>.</p>
				<p>I understand, from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hickman was to see her some time ago, from Miss Howe; and I am told, by <em>another</em> hand, (you see, Sir, how diligent I have been to execute the <em>commissions</em> you gave me), that he had no <em>extraordinary opinion</em> of this Belford at first; though they were seen together one morning by the opposite neighbour, at <em>breakfast</em>: and another time this Belford was observed to <em>watch</em> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hickman’s coming from her; so that, as it should seem, he was mighty zealous to <em>ingratiate</em> himself with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hickman; no doubt to engage him to make a <em>favourable report to Miss Howe</em> of the <em>intimacy</em> he was admitted into by her unhappy friend; who (<em>as she is very ill</em>) may <em>mean no harm</em> in allowing his visits, (for he, it seemeth, brought to her, or recommended, at least, the doctor and apothecary that attend her): but I think (upon the whole) <em>it looketh not well</em>.</p>
				<p>I am sorry, Sir, I cannot give you a better account of the young lady’s <em>prudence</em>. But, what shall we say?</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<i xml:lang="la">Uvaque conspectâ livorem ducit ab uvâ,</i>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">as Juvenal observeth.</p>
				<p>One thing I am afraid of; which is, that Miss may be under <em>necessities</em>; and that this Belford (who, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith owns, hath <em>offered her money</em>, which she, <em>at the time</em>, refused) may find an opportunity to <em>take advantage</em> of those <em>necessities</em>: and it is well observed by that poet, that</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="la">
					<p>
						<span>Aegrè formosam poteris servare puellam:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nunc prece, nunc pretio, forma petita ruit.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And this Belford (who is a <em>bold man</em>, and hath, as they say, the <em>look</em> of one) may make good that of Horace, (with whose writings you are so well acquainted; nobody better);</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<i xml:lang="la">Audax omnia perpeti, Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas.</i>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Forgive me, Sir, for what I am going to write: but if you could prevail upon the rest of your family to join in the scheme which <em>you</em>, and her <em>virtuous sister</em>, Miss Arabella, and the Archdeacon, and I, once talked of, (which is to persuade the unhappy young lady to go, in some <em>creditable</em> manner, to some one of the foreign colonies), it might not save only her <em>own credit</em> and <em>reputation</em>, but the <em>reputation</em> and <em>credit</em> of all her <em>family</em>, and a great deal of <em>vexation</em> moreover. For it is my humble opinion, that you will hardly (any of you) enjoy yourselves while this (<em>once</em> innocent) young lady is in the way of being so frequently heard of by you: and this would put her <em>out of the way</em> both of <em>this Belford</em> and of <em>that Lovelace</em>, and it might, peradventure, prevent as much <em>evil</em> as <em>scandal</em>.</p>
				<p>You will forgive me, Sir, for this my <em>plainness</em>. Ovid pleadeth for me,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<i xml:lang="la">—Adulator nullus amicus erit.</i>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>And I have no view but that of approving myself a <em>zealous well-wisher</em> to <em>all</em> your worthy family, (whereto I owe a great number of obligations), and very particularly, Sir,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your obliged and humble servant,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Elias Brand.</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline"><abbr>Wedn.</abbr> <time datetime="08-09"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 9</time>.</p>
					<div epub:type="z3998:postscript">
						<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.S.</abbr>: I shall give you <em>farther hints</em> when I come down, (which will be in a few days); and who my <em>informants</em> were; but by <em>these</em> you will see, that I have been very assiduous (for the time) in the task you set me upon.</p>
						<p>The <em>length</em> of my letter you will excuse: for I need not tell you, Sir, what <em>narrative</em>, <em>complex</em>, and <em>conversation</em> letters (such a one as <em>mine</em>) require. Everyone to his <em>talent</em>. <em>Letter-writing</em> is mine. I will be bold to say; and that my <em>correspondence</em> was much coveted in the university, on that account, by <em>tyros</em>, and by <em>sophs</em>, when I was hardly a <em>soph</em> myself. But this I should not have taken upon myself to mention, but only in defence of the <em>length</em> of my letter; for nobody writeth <em>shorter</em> or <em>pithier</em>, when the subject requireth <em>common forms</em> only⁠—but, in apologizing for my <em>prolixity</em>, I am <em>adding</em> to the <em>fault</em>, (if it were one, which, however, I cannot think it to be, the <em>subject</em> considered: but this I have said before in other words): so, Sir, if you will excuse my <em>postscript</em>, I am sure you will not find fault with my <em>letter</em>.</p>
						<p>One word more as to a matter of <em>erudition</em>, which you greatly love to hear me <em>start</em> and <em>dwell upon</em>. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Lewen once, in <em>your</em> presence, (as you, <em>my good patron</em>, cannot but remember), in a <em>smartish</em> kind of debate between <em>him</em> and <em>me</em>, took upon him to censure the <em>paranthetical</em> style, as I call it. He was a very learned and judicious man, to be sure, and an ornament to <em>our function</em>: but yet I must needs say, that it is a style which I greatly like; and the good Doctor was then past his <em>youth</em>, and that time of life, of consequence, when a <em>fertile imagination</em>, and a <em>rich fancy</em>, pour in ideas so fast upon a writer, that parentheses are often wanted (and that for the sake of <em>brevity</em>, as well as <em>perspicuity</em>) to save the reader the trouble of reading a passage <em>more than once</em>. Every man to his talent, (as I said before). We are all so apt to set up our <em>natural biases</em> for <em>general standards</em>, that I wondered <em>the less</em> at the worthy Doctor’s <em>stiffness</em> on this occasion. He <em>smiled at me</em>, you may remember, Sir⁠—and, whether I was right or not, I am sure I <em>smiled at him</em>. And <em>you</em>, my <em>worthy patron</em>, (as I had the satisfaction to observe), seemed to be of <em>my party</em>. But was it not strange, that the <em>old gentleman</em> and <em>I</em> should so widely differ, when the <em>end</em> with <em>both</em> (that is to say, <em>perspicuity</em> or <em>clearness</em>), was the same?⁠—But what shall we say?⁠—<i xml:lang="la">Errare est hominis, sed non persistere</i>.</p>
						<p>I think I have nothing to add until I have the honour of attending you in <em>person</em>; but I am, (as above), <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
					</div>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">
						<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr>
					</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
