<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 477: Mr. Belford, to Richard Mowbray, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-477" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">477</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Belford, to Richard Mowbray, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Thursday Afternoon</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Mowbray,</p>
				</header>
				<p>I am glad to hear you are in town. Throw yourself the moment this comes to your hand, (if possible with Tourville), in the way of the man who least of all men deserves the love of the worthy heart; but most that of thine and Tourville; else the news I shall most probably send him within an hour or two, will make annihilation the greatest blessing he has to wish for.</p>
				<p>You will find him between Piccadilly and Kensington, most probably on horseback, riding backwards and forwards in a crazy way; or put up, perhaps, at some inn or tavern in the way⁠—a waiter possibly, if so, watching for his servant’s return to him from me.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>His man Will is just come to me. He will carry this to you in his way back, and be your director. Hie away in a coach, or anyhow. Your being with him may save either his or a servant’s life. See the blessed effects of triumphant libertinism! Sooner or later it comes home to us, and all concludes in gall and bitterness!</p>
				<footer>
					<p>Adieu.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Belford.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
