<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 103: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-103" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">103</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
			</hgroup>
			<div class="abstract">
				<p>[<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, in continuation of his last letter, (No. 99), gives an account to his friend (pretty much to the same effect with the lady’s) of all that passed between them at the inns, in the journey, and till their fixing at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sorling’s; to avoid repetition, those passages in his narrative are extracted, which will serve to embellish hers; to open his views; or to display the humorous talent he was noted for.</p>
				<p>At their alighting at the inn at <abbr>St.</abbr> Alban’s on Monday night, thus he writes:]</p>
			</div>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>The people who came about us, as we alighted, seemed by their jaw-fallen faces, and goggling eyes, to wonder at beholding a charming young lady, majesty in her air and aspect, so composedly dressed, yet with features so discomposed, come off a journey which made the cattle smoke, and the servants sweat. I read their curiosity in their faces, and my beloved’s uneasiness in hers. She cast a conscious glance, as she alighted, upon her habit, which was <em>no habit</em>; and repulsively, as I may say, quitting my assisting hand, hurried into the house.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Ovid was not a greater master of metamorphoses than thy friend. To the mistress of the house I instantly changed her into a sister, brought off by surprise from a near relation’s, (where she had wintered), to prevent her marrying a confounded rake, (I love always to go as near the truth as I can), whom her father and mother, her elder sister, and all her loving uncles, aunts, and cousins abhorred. This accounted for my charmer’s expected sullens; for her displeasure when she was to join me again, were it to hold; for her unsuitable dress upon the road; and, at the same time, gave her a proper and seasonable assurance of my honourable views.</p>
				<p class="abstract">[Upon the debate between the lady and him, and particularly upon that part where she upbraids him with putting a young creature upon making a sacrifice of her duty and conscience, he writes:]</p>
				<p>All these, and still more mortifying things, she said.</p>
				<p>I heard her in silence. But when it came to my turn, I pleaded, I argued, I answered her, as well as I could.⁠—And when humility would not do, I raised my voice, and suffered my eyes to sparkle with anger; hoping to take advantage of that sweet cowardice which is so amiable in the sex, and to which my victory over this proud beauty is principally owing.</p>
				<p>She was not intimidated, however, and was going to rise upon me in her temper; and would have broken in upon my defence. But when a man talks to a woman upon such subjects, let her be ever so much in <em>alt</em>, ’tis strange, if he cannot throw out a tub to the whale;⁠—that is to say, if he cannot divert her from resenting one bold thing, by uttering two or three full as bold; but for which more favourable interpretations will lie.</p>
				<p class="abstract">[To that part, where she tells him of the difficulty she made to correspond with him at first, thus he writes:]</p>
				<p>Very true, my precious!⁠—And innumerable have been the difficulties thou hast made me struggle with. But one day thou mayest wish, that thou hadst spared this boast; as well as those other pretty haughtinesses, “That thou didst not reject Solmes for <em>my</em> sake: that <em>my</em> glory, if I valued myself upon carrying thee off, was <em>thy</em> shame: that I have more merit with <em>myself</em> than with thee, or anybody else: (<em>what a coxcomb she makes me, Jack</em>!) that thou wishest thyself in thy father’s house again, <q>whatever were to be the consequence</q>.”⁠—If I forgive thee, charmer, for these hints, for these reflections, for these wishes, for these contempts, I am not the Lovelace I have been reputed to be; and that thy treatment of me shows that thou thinkest I am.</p>
				<p>In short, her whole air throughout this debate expressed a majestic kind of indignation, which implied a believed superiority of talents over the person to whom she spoke.</p>
				<p>Thou hast heard me often expatiate upon the pitiful figure a man must make, whose wife <em>has</em>, or <em>believes</em> she has, more sense than himself. A thousand reasons could I give why I ought not to think of marrying Miss Clarissa Harlowe; at least till I can be sure, that she loves me with the preference I must expect from a wife.</p>
				<p>I begin to stagger in my resolutions. Ever averse as I was to the hymeneal shackles, how easily will prejudices recur! Heaven give me the heart to be honest to my Clarissa!⁠—There’s a prayer, Jack! If I should not be heard, what a sad thing would that be, for the most admirable of women!⁠—Yet, as I do no often trouble Heaven with my prayers, who knows but this may be granted?</p>
				<p>But there lie before me such charming difficulties, such scenery for intrigue, for stratagem, for enterprize. What a horrible thing, that my talents point all that way!⁠—When I know what is honourable and just; and would almost wish to be honest?⁠—<em>Almost</em>, I say; for such a varlet am I, that I cannot altogether wish it, for the soul of me!⁠—Such a triumph over the whole sex, if I can subdue this lady! My maiden vow, as I may call it!⁠—For did not the sex begin with me? And does this lady spare me? Thinkest thou, Jack, that I should have spared my Rosebud, had I been set at defiance thus?⁠—Her grandmother besought me, at first, <q>to spare her Rosebud</q>: and when a girl is put, or puts herself into a man’s power, what can he wish for <em>further</em>? while I always considered opposition and resistance as a challenge to do my worst.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a></p>
				<p>Why, why, will the dear creature take such pains to appear all ice to me?⁠—Why will she, by <em>her</em> pride, awaken <em>mine</em>?⁠—Hast thou not seen, in the above, how contemptibly she treats me?⁠—What have I not suffered <em>for</em> her, and even <em>from</em> her!⁠—Ought I to bear being told, that she will despise me, if I value myself above that odious Solmes?</p>
				<p>Then she cuts me short in all my ardours. To <em>vow fidelity</em>, is by a cursed turn upon me, to show, that there is reason, in my own opinion, for doubt of it. The very same reflection upon me once before.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a></p>
				<p>In my power, or out of my power, all one to this lady.⁠—So, Belford, my poor vows are crammed down my throat, before they can well rise to my lips. And what can a lover say to his mistress, if she will neither let him lie nor swear?</p>
				<p>One little piece of artifice I had recourse to: When she pushed so hard for me to leave her, I made a request to her, upon a condition she could not refuse; and pretended as much gratitude upon her granting it, as if it were a favour of the last consequence.</p>
				<p>And what was this? but to promise what she had before promised, “Never to marry any other man, while I am living, and single, unless I should give her cause for high disgust against me.” This, you know, was promising nothing, because she could be offended at any time, and was to be the sole judge of the offence. But it showed her how reasonable and just my expectations were; and that I was no encroacher.</p>
				<p>She consented; and asked what security I expected? Her word only.</p>
				<p>She gave me her word: but I besought her excuse for sealing it: and in the same moment (since to have waited for consent would have been asking for a denial) saluted her. And, believe me, or not, but, as I hope to live, it was the first time I had the courage to touch her charming lips with mine. And this I tell thee, Belford, that that single pressure (as modestly put too, as if I were as much a virgin as herself, that she might not be afraid of me another time) delighted me more than ever I was delighted by the <em>ultimatum</em> with any other woman.⁠—So precious do awe, reverence, and apprehended prohibition, make a favour!</p>
				<p>And now, Belford, I am only afraid that I shall be <em>too</em> cunning; for she does not at present talk enough for me. I hardly know what to make of the dear creature yet.</p>
				<p>I topped the brother’s part on Monday night before the landlady at <abbr>St.</abbr> Alban’s; asking my sister’s pardon for carrying her off so unprepared for a journey; prated of the joy my father and mother, and all our friends, would have in receiving her; and this with so many circumstances, that I perceived, by a look she gave me, that went through my very veins, that I had gone too far. I apologized for it indeed when alone; but could not penetrate for the soul of me, whether I made the matter better or worse by it.</p>
				<p>But I am of too frank a nature: my success, and the joy I have because of the jewel I am half in possession of, has not only unlocked my bosom, but left the door quite open.</p>
				<p>This is a confounded sly sex. Would she but speak out, as I do⁠—but I must learn reserves of her.</p>
				<p>She must needs be unprovided of money: but has too much pride to accept of any from me. I would have had her go to town (<em>to town, if possible, must I get her to consent to go</em>) in order to provide herself with the richest of silks which that can afford. But neither is this to be assented to. And yet, as my intelligencer acquaints me, her implacable relations are resolved to distress her all they can.</p>
				<p>These wretches have been most gloriously raving, ever since her flight; and still, thank Heaven, continue to rave; and will, I hope, for a twelvemonth to come. Now, at last, it is my day!</p>
				<p>Bitterly do they regret, that they permitted her poultry-visits, and garden-walks, which gave her the opportunity to effect an escape which they suppose preconcerted. For, as to her dining in the ivy-bower, they had a cunning design to answer upon her in that permission, as Betty told Joseph her lover.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a></p>
				<p>They lost, they say, an excellent pretence for confining her <em>more</em> closely on my threatening to rescue her, if they offered to carry her against her will to old Antony’s moated house.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a> For this, as I told thee at the Hart, and as I once hinted to the dear creature herself,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a> they had it in deliberation to do; apprehending, that I might attempt to carry her off, either with or without her consent, on some one of those connived-at excursions.</p>
				<p>But here my honest Joseph, who gave me the information, was of admirable service to me. I had taught him to make the Harlowes believe, that I was as communicative to <em>my</em> servants, as their stupid James was to Joseph:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a> Joseph, as they supposed, by tampering with Will,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a> got all my secrets, and was acquainted with all my motions: and having also undertaken to watch all those of his young lady,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a> the wise family were secure; and so was my beloved; and so was I.</p>
				<p>I once had it in my head (and I hinted it to thee<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a> in a former) in case such a step should be necessary, to attempt to carry her off by surprise from the wood-house; as it is remote from the dwelling-house. This, had I attempted, I should have certainly effected, by the help of the confraternity: and it would have been an action worthy of us all.⁠—But Joseph’s conscience, as he called it, stood in my way; for he thought it must have been known to be done by his connivance. I could, I dare say, have overcome this scruple, <em>as easily as I did many of the others</em>, had I not depended at one time upon her meeting me at midnight or late hour (and, if she had, she never would have gone back); at other times, upon the cunning family’s doing my work for me, equally against their knowledge or their wills.</p>
				<p>For well I knew, that James and Arabella were determined never to leave off their foolish trials and provocations, till, by tiring her out, they had either made her Solmes’s wife, or guilty of some such rashness as should throw her forever out of the favour of both her uncles; though they had too much malice in their heads to intend service to me by their persecutions of her.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
