<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 205: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-205" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">205</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">
					<time datetime="05-24">May 24</time>
				</p>
				<p>The devil take this uncle of mine! He has at last sent me a letter which I cannot show, without exposing the head of our family for a fool. A confounded parcel of popguns has he let off upon me. I was in hopes he had exhausted his whole stock of this sort in his letter to you.⁠—To keep it back, to delay sending it, till he had recollected all this <em>farrago</em> of nonsense⁠—confound his <q>wisdom of nations</q>, if so much of it is to be scraped together, in disgrace of itself, to make one egregious simpleton!⁠—But I am glad I am fortified with this piece of flagrant folly, however; since, in all human affairs, the <em>convenient</em> and <em>inconvenient</em>, the <em>good</em> and the <em>bad</em>, are so mingled, that there is no having the one without the other.</p>
				<p>I have already offered the bill enclosed in it to my beloved; and read to her part of the letter. But she refused the bill: and, as I am in cash myself, I shall return it. She seemed very desirous to peruse the whole letter. And when I told her, that, were it not for exposing the writer, I would oblige her, she said, it would not be exposing his Lordship to show it to her; and that she always preferred the heart to the head. I knew her meaning; but did not thank her for it.</p>
				<p>All that makes for me in it I will transcribe for her⁠—yet, hang it, she shall have the letter, and my soul with it, for one consenting kiss.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>She has got the letter from me without the reward. Deuce take me, if I had the courage to propose the condition. A new character this of bashfulness in thy friend. I see, <q>that a truly modest woman may make even a confident man keep his distance</q>. By my soul, Belford, I believe, that nine women in ten, who fall, fall either <em>from their own vanity</em> or <em>levity</em>, or for want of <em>circumspection</em> and <em>proper reserves</em>.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>I did intend to take my reward on her returning a letter so favourable to us both. But she sent it to me, sealed up, by Dorcas. I might have thought that there were two or three hints in it, that she would be too nice immediately to appear to. I send it to thee; and here will stop, to give thee time to read it. Return it as soon as thou hast perused it.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
