<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 260: Mr. Lovelace, to John Belford, Esq.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-260" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">260</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovelace, to John Belford, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Esq.</abbr></p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>I have just now had a specimen of what the resentment of this dear creature will be when quite recovered: an affecting one!⁠—For entering her apartment after Dorcas; and endeavouring to soothe and pacify her disordered mind; in the midst of my blandishments, she held up to Heaven, in a speechless agony, the innocent license (which she has in her own power); as the poor distressed Catalans held up their English treaty, on an occasion that keeps the worst of my actions in countenance.</p>
				<p>She seemed about to call down vengeance upon me; when, happily the leaden god, in pity to her trembling Lovelace, waved over her half-drowned eyes his somniferous want, and laid asleep the fair exclaimer, before she could go half through with her intended imprecation.</p>
				<p>Thou wilt guess, by what I have written, that some <em>little art</em> has been made use of: but it was with a <em>generous</em> design (if thou’lt allow me the word on such an occasion) in order to lessen the too-quick sense she was likely to have of what she was to suffer. A contrivance I never had occasion for before, and had not thought of now, if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sinclair had not proposed it to me: to whom I left the management of it: and I have done nothing but curse her ever since, lest the quantity should have forever dampened her charming intellects.</p>
				<p>Hence my concern⁠—for I think the poor lady ought not to have been so treated. <em>Poor lady</em>, did I say?⁠—What have I to do with thy creeping style?⁠—But have not I the worst of it; since her insensibility has made me but a thief to my own joys?</p>
				<p>I did not intend to tell thee of this little <em>innocent</em> trick; for such I designed it to be; but that I hate disingenuousness: to thee, especially: and as I cannot help writing in a more serious vein than usual, thou wouldst perhaps, had I not hinted the true cause, have imagined that I was sorry for the fact itself: and this would have given <em>thee</em> a good deal of trouble in scribbling dull persuasives to repair by matrimony; and <em>me</em> in reading thy cruel nonsense. Besides, one day or other, thou mightest, had I not confessed it, have heard of it in an aggravated manner; and I know thou hast such an high opinion of this lady’s virtue, that thou wouldst be disappointed, if thou hadst reason to think that she was subdued by <em>her own</em> consent, or any the least yielding in her will. And so is she beholden to me in some measure, that, at the expense of <em>my</em> honour, she may so justly form a plea, which will entirely salve <em>hers</em>.</p>
				<p>And now is the whole secret out.</p>
				<p>Thou wilt say I am a horrid fellow!⁠—As the lady does, that I am the <em>unchained Beelzebub</em>, and a <em>plotting villain</em>: and as this is what you both said beforehand, and nothing worse <em>can</em> be said, I desire, if thou wouldst not have me quite serious with thee, and that I should think thou meanest more by thy tilting hint than I am willing to believe thou dost, that thou wilt forbear thy invectives: For is not the thing done?⁠—Can it be helped?⁠—And must I not now try to make the best of it?⁠—And the rather do I enjoin to make thee this, and inviolable secrecy; because I begin to think that my punishment will be greater than the fault, were it to be only from my own reflection.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
