<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter 62: Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="letter-62" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal">62</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday Morning, 7 o’clock</p>
				</header>
				<p>My uncle has vouchsafed to answer me. These that follow are the contents of his letter; but just now brought me, although written last night⁠—late I suppose.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Monday Night.</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Miss Clary,</p>
					</header>
					<p>Since you are grown such a bold challenger, and teach us all our duty, though you will not practise your own, I <em>must</em> answer you. Nobody wants your estate from you. Are <em>you</em>, who refuse everybody’s advice, to prescribe a husband to your <em>sister</em>? Your letter to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes is inexcusable. I blamed you for it before. Your parents <em>will</em> be obeyed. It is fit they <em>should</em>. Your mother has nevertheless prevailed to have your going to your uncle Antony’s put off till Thursday: yet owns you deserve not that, or any other favour from her. I will receive no more of your letters. You are too artful for me. You are an ungrateful and unreasonable child: Must you have your way paramount to everybody’s? How are you altered.</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your displeased uncle,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">John Harlowe.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<hr/>
				<p>To be carried away on Thursday⁠—To the moated house⁠—To the chapel⁠—To Solmes! How can I think of this!⁠—They will make me desperate.</p>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday Morning, 8 o’clock.</p>
				<p>I have another letter from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. I opened it with the expectation of its being filled with bold and free complaints, on my not writing to prevent his two nights watching, in weather not extremely agreeable. But, instead of complaints, he is “full of tender concern lest I may have been prevented by indisposition, or by the closer confinement which he has frequently cautioned me that I may expect.”</p>
				<p>He says, “He had been in different disguises loitering about our garden and park wall, all the day on Sunday last; and all Sunday night was wandering about the coppice, and near the back door. It rained; and he has got a great cold, attended with feverishness, and so hoarse, that he has almost lost his voice.”</p>
				<p>Why did he not flame out in his letter?⁠—Treated as I am treated by my friends, it is dangerous to be laid under the sense of an obligation to an addresser’s patience; especially when such a one suffers in health for my sake.</p>
				<p>“He had no shelter, he says, but under the great overgrown ivy, which spreads wildly round the heads of two or three oaklings; and that was soon wet through.”</p>
				<p>You remember the spot. You and I, my dear, once thought ourselves obliged to the natural shade which those ivy-covered oaklings afforded us, in a sultry day.</p>
				<p>I can’t help saying, I am sorry he has suffered for my sake; but ’tis his own seeking.</p>
				<p>His letter is dated last night at eight: “And, indisposed as he is, he tells me that he will watch till ten, in hopes of my giving him the meeting he so earnestly request. And after that, he has a mile to walk to his horse and servant; and four miles then to ride to his inn.”</p>
				<p>He owns, “That he has an intelligencer in our family; who has failed him for a day or two past: and not knowing how I do, or how I may be treated, his anxiety is increased.”</p>
				<p>This circumstance gives me to guess who this intelligencer is: Joseph Leman: the very creature employed and confided in, more than any other, by my brother.</p>
				<p>This is not an honourable way of proceeding in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace. Did he learn this infamous practice of corrupting the servants of other families at the French court, where he resided a good while?</p>
				<p>I have been often jealous of this Leman in my little airings and poultry-visits. Doubly obsequious as he was always to me, I have thought him my brother’s spy upon me; and although he obliged me by his hastening out of the garden and poultry-yard, whenever I came into either, have wondered, that from <em>his reports</em> my liberties of those kinds have not been abridged.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a> So, possibly, this man may be bribed by both, yet betray both. Worthy views want not such obliquities as these on either side. An honest mind must rise into indignation both at the traitor-maker and the traitor.</p>
				<p>“He presses with the utmost earnestness for an interview. He would not presume, he says, to disobey my last personal commands, that he should not endeavour to attend me again in the wood-house. But says, he can give me such reasons for my permitting him to wait upon my father or uncles, as he hopes will be approved by me: for he cannot help observing, that it is no more suitable to my own spirit than to his, that he, a man of fortune and family, should be obliged to pursue such a clandestine address, as would only become a vile fortune-hunter. But, if I will give my consent for his visiting me like a man, and a gentleman, no ill treatment shall provoke him to forfeit his temper.</p>
				<p>“Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> will accompany him, if I please: or Lady Betty Lawrance will first make the visit to my mother, or to my aunt Hervey, or even to my uncles, if I choose it. And such terms shall be offered, as <em>shall</em> have weight upon them.</p>
				<p>“He begs, that I will not deny him making a visit to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solmes. By all that’s good, he vows, that it shall not be with the least intention either to hurt or affront him; but only to set before him, calmly and rationally, the consequences that may possibly flow from so fruitless a perseverance, as well as the ungenerous folly of it, to a mind as noble as mine. He repeats his own resolution to attend my pleasure, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morden’s arrival and advice, for the reward of his own patience.</p>
				<p>“It is impossible, he says, but one of these methods <em>must</em> do. Presence, he observes, even of a disliked person, takes off the edge of resentments which absence whets, and makes keen.</p>
				<p>“He therefore most earnestly repeats his importunities for the supplicated interview.” He says, “He has business of consequence in London: but cannot stir from the inconvenient spot where he has for some time resided, in disguises unworthy of himself, until he can be absolutely certain, that I shall not be prevailed upon, either by force or otherwise; and until he finds me delivered from the insults of my brother. Nor ought this to be an indifferent point to one, for whose sake all the world reports me to be used unworthily. But <em>one</em> remark, he says, he cannot help making: that did my friends know the little favour I show him, and the very great distance I keep him at, they would have no reason to confine me on his account. And <em>another</em>, that they <em>themselves</em> seem to think him entitled to a different usage, and expect that he receives it; when, in truth, what he meets with from me is exactly what they wish him to meet with, excepting in the favour of my correspondence I honour him with; upon which, he says, he puts the highest value, and for the sake of which he has submitted to a thousand indignities.</p>
				<p>“He renews his professions of reformation. He is convinced, he says, that he has already run a long and dangerous course; and that it is high time to think of returning. It <em>must be</em> from proper conviction, he says, that a person who has lived too gay a life, resolves to reclaim, before age or sufferings come upon him.</p>
				<p>“All generous spirits, he observes, hate compulsion. Upon this observation he dwells; but regrets, that he is likely to owe all his hopes to this compulsion; this <em>injudicious</em> compulsion, he justly calls it; and none to my esteem for him. Although he presumes upon some merit⁠—in this implicit regard to my will⁠—in the bearing the daily indignities offered not only to him, but to his relations, by my brother⁠—in the nightly watchings, his present indisposition makes him mention, or he had not debased the nobleness of his passion for me, by such a selfish instance.”</p>
				<p>I cannot but say, I am sorry the man is not well.</p>
				<p>I am afraid to ask you, my dear, what <em>you</em> would have done, thus situated. But what I <em>have</em> done, I <em>have</em> done. In a word, I wrote, “That I would, if possible, give him a meeting tomorrow night, between the hours of nine and twelve, by the ivy summerhouse, or in it, or near the great cascade, at the bottom of the garden; and would unbolt the door, that he might come in by his own key. But that, if I found the meeting impracticable, or should change my mind, I would signify as much by another line; which he must wait for until it were dark.”</p>
				<hr/>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Tuesday, Eleven o’clock.</p>
				<p>I am just returned from depositing my billet. How diligent is this man! It is plain he was in waiting: for I had walked but a few paces, after I had deposited it, when, my heart misgiving me, I returned, to have taken it back, in order to reconsider it as I walked, and whether I should or should not let it go. But I found it gone.</p>
				<p>In all probability, there was but a brick wall, of a few inches thick, between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lovelace and me, at the very time I put the letter under the brick!</p>
				<p>I am come back dissatisfied with myself. But I think, my dear, there can be no harm in meeting him. If I do <em>not</em>, he may take some violent measures. What he knows of the treatment I meet with in malice to him, and with the view to frustrate all his hopes, may make him desperate. His behaviour last time I saw him, under the disadvantages of time and place, and surprised as I was, gives me no apprehension of anything but discovery. What he requires is not unreasonable, and cannot affect my future choice and determination: it is only to assure him from my own lips, that I never will be the wife of a man I hate. If I have not an opportunity to meet without hazard or detection, he must once more bear the disappointment. All his trouble, and mine too, is owing to his faulty character. This, although I hate tyranny and arrogance in all shapes, makes me think less of the risks he runs, and the fatigues he undergoes, than otherwise I should do; and still less, as my sufferings (derived from the same source) are greater than his.</p>
				<p>Betty confirms this intimation, that I must go to my uncle’s on Thursday. She was sent on purpose to direct me to prepare myself for going, and to help me to get everything up in order for my removal.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
